(client) shall establish an Information Security Management System that takes into consideration the context of the organization by defining external and internal issues that are relevant to its purpose and that affect its ability to achieve the intended outcomes of its information security management system.
(client) shall determine interested parties that are relevant to the information security management system, and the requirements of these interested parties relevant to information security. The requirements of interested parties may include legal and regulatory requirements and contractual obligations.
(client) shall determine the boundaries and applicability of the information security management system to establish its scope.
When determining this scope, (client) shall take into consideration the external and internal issues, the requirements of the interested parties, and the interfaces and dependencies between activities performed by (client), and those that are performed by other organizations.
The Information Security Management System scope shall be available as documented information.
(client) shall establish, implement, maintain and continually improve an information security management system, in accordance with the requirements of the ISO27001 international standard.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by ensuring the information security policy and the information security objectives are established and are compatible with the strategic direction of (client).
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by ensuring the integration of the information security management system requirements into (client)’s processes.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by ensuring that the resources needed for the information security management system are available.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by communicating the importance of effective information security management and of conforming to the information security management system requirements.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by ensuring that the information security management system achieves its intended outcome(s).
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by directing and supporting persons to contribute to the effectiveness of the information security management system.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by promoting continual improvement.
(client)'s management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to the information security management system by supporting other relevant management roles to demonstrate their leadership as it applies to their areas of responsibility.
(client) shall establish an information security policy that is appropriate to the purpose of the organization.
(client) shall establish an information security policy that includes information security objectives or provides the framework for setting information security objectives.
(client) shall establish an information security policy that includes a commitment to satisfy applicable requirements related to information security.
(client) shall establish an information security policy that includes a commitment to continual improvement of the information security management system.
The information security policy shall be available as documented information.
The information security policy shall be communicated within (client).
The information security policy shall be available to interested parties, as appropriate.
(client) shall ensure that the responsibilities and authorities for roles relevant to information security are assigned and communicated.
(client) shall assign the responsibility and authority for ensuring that the information security management system conforms to the requirements of regulatory standards.
(client) shall assign the responsibility and authority for reporting on the performance of the information security management system to top management.
(client) shall assign the responsibility and authority for reporting performance of the information security management system within (client).
(client) shall consider the issues that are relevant to its purpose and affect its ability to achieve the intended outcomes of its information security management system and the requirements referred of the interested parties.
(client) shall determine the risks and opportunities that need to be addressed to ensure the information security management system can achieve its intended outcomes.
(client) shall determine the risks and opportunities that need to be addressed to prevent, or reduce, undesired effects.
(client) shall determine the risks and opportunities that need to be addressed to achieve continual improvement.
(client) shall plan actions to address these risks and opportunities; and how to integrate and implement the actions into its information security management system processes and evaluate the effectiveness of these actions.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that establishes and maintains information security risk criteria that include the risk acceptance criteria; and criteria for performing information security risk assessments.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that ensures that repeated information security risk assessments produce consistent, valid and comparable results.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that identifies the information security risks.
The information security risk assessment process shall identify risks associated with the loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability for information within the scope of the information security management system.
The information security risk assessment process shall identify the risk owners.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that analyses the information security risks by assessing the potential consequences that would result if the risks identified were to materialize.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that analyses the information security risks by assessing the realistic likelihood of the occurrence of the risks identified.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that analyses the information security risks by determining the levels of risk.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk assessment process that evaluates the information security risks by comparing the results of risk analysis with the risk criteria established and prioritizing the analyzed risks for risk treatment.
(client) shall retain documented information about the information security risk assessment process.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to select appropriate information security risk treatment options, taking account of the risk assessment results.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to determine all controls that are necessary to implement the information security risk treatment options chosen.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to compare the applicable controls determined and verify that no necessary controls have been omitted.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to produce a Statement of Applicability that contains the necessary controls and justification for inclusions, whether they are implemented or not, and the justification for exclusions of controls.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to formulate an information security risk treatment plan.
(client) shall define and apply an information security risk treatment process to obtain risk owners’ approval of the information security risk treatment plan and acceptance of the residual information security risks.
(client) shall retain documented information about the information security risk treatment process.
(client) shall establish information security objectives at relevant functions and levels.
The information security objectives shall be consistent with the information security policy.
The information security objectives shall be measurable (if practicable).
The information security objectives shall take into account applicable information security requirements, and results from risk assessment and risk treatment.
The information security objectives shall be communicated.
The information security objectives shall be updated as appropriate.
(client) shall retain documented information on the information security objectives.
When planning how to achieve its information security objectives, (client) shall determine what will be done.
When planning how to achieve its information security objectives, (client) shall determine what resources will be required.
When planning how to achieve its information security objectives, (client) shall determine who will be responsible.
When planning how to achieve its information security objectives, (client) shall determine when it will be completed.
When planning how to achieve its information security objectives, (client) shall determine how the results will be evaluated.
When (client) determines the need for changes to the information security management system, the changes shall be carried out in a planned manner.
(client) shall determine and provide the resources needed for the establishment, implementation, maintenance and continual improvement of the information security management system
(client) shall determine the necessary competence of person(s) doing work under its control that affects its information security performance.
(client) shall ensure that these persons are competent on the basis of appropriate education, training, or experience.
(client) where applicable, shall take actions to acquire the necessary competence, and evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken.
(client) shall retain appropriate documented information as evidence of competence.
(clients) shall ensure that persons doing work under (client)’s control are aware of the information security policy.
(clients) shall ensure that persons doing work under (client)’s control are aware of their contribution to the effectiveness of the information security management system, including the benefits of improved information security performance.
(clients) shall ensure that persons doing work under (client)’s control are aware of the implications of not conforming with the information security management system requirements.
(client) shall determine the need for internal and external communications relevant to the information security management system.
Relevant internal and external communications shall include what to communicate.
Relevant internal and external communications shall include when to communicate.
Relevant internal and external communications shall include with whom to communicate.
Relevant internal and external communications shall include who shall communicate.
Relevant internal and external communications shall include the processes by which communication are affected.
(client)’s information security management system shall include all the documented information required by the ISO27001 standard
(client)’s information security management system shall include all the documented information determined by (client) as being necessary for the effectiveness of the information security management system.
When creating and updating documented information (client) shall ensure appropriate identification and description (e.g. a title, date, author, or reference number).
When creating and updating documented information (client) shall ensure appropriate format (e.g. language, software version, graphics) and media (e.g. paper, electronic).
When creating and updating documented information (client) shall ensure appropriate review and approval for suitability and adequacy.
(client) shall ensure that all documented information required by the information security management system are available and suitable for use, where and when it is needed.
(client) shall ensure that all documented information required by the information security management system are adequately protected (e.g. from loss of confidentiality, improper use, or loss of integrity).
For all the documented information (client) shall ensure proper distribution, access, retrieval and use.
For all the documented information (client) shall ensure proper storage and preservation, including the preservation of legibility.
For all the documented information (client) shall ensure proper control of changes (e.g. version control).
For all the documented information (client) shall ensure proper retention and disposition.
(client) shall plan, implement and control the processes needed to meet information security requirements, and to implement the actions determined to address risks and opportunities.
(client) shall keep documented information to the extent necessary to have confidence that the processes have been carried out as planned.
(client) shall control planned changes and reviews the consequences of unintended changes, taking action to mitigate any adverse effects, as necessary.
(client) shall ensure that outsourced processes are determined and controlled.
(client) shall perform information security risk assessments at planned intervals or when significant changes are proposed or occur, taking account of the criteria established.
(client) shall retain documented information of the results of the information security risk assessments.
(client) shall implement the information security risk treatment plan.
(client) shall retain documented information of the results of the information security risk treatment
(client) shall evaluate the information security performance and the effectiveness of the information security management system.
(client) shall determine what needs to be monitored and measured, including information security processes and controls.
(client) shall determine the methods for monitoring, measurement, analysis and evaluation, as applicable, to ensure valid results.
(client) shall determine when the monitoring and measuring shall be performed.
(client) shall determine who shall monitor and measure.
(client) shall determine when the results from monitoring and measurement shall be analysed and evaluated.
(client) shall determine who shall analyse and evaluate these results.
The methods selected for monitoring, measurement, and evalutaiotn should produce comparable and reproducible results to be considered valid.
(client) shall retain appropriate documented information as evidence of the monitoring and measurement results.
(client) shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to verify conformity with its information security management system requirements, ISO 27001 standards, and ensure effective implementation and maintenance.
(client) shall plan, establish, implement, and maintain audit program(s) with defined frequencies, methods, responsibilities, planning requirements, and reporting procedures.
In establishing the internal audit program(s), (client) shall consider the significance of the processes involved and integrate insights from previous audits.
(client) shall define audit criteria and scope for each audit within the established program.
When conducting audits, (client) shall carefully select auditors to ensure objectivity and impartiality throughout the audit process.
(client) commits to reporting the results of internal audits to the relevant management for appropriate action.
Documented information shall be maintained as evidence of the effective implementation of the audit program(s) and the results obtained.
The Information Security steering committee shall review the organization’s information security management system at planned intervals to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness.
Reviews shall consider the status of actions from previous management reviews.
Reviews shall consider changes in external and internal issues that are relevant to the information security management system.
Reviews shall consider feedback on the information security performance, including trends in nonconformities and corrective actions, monitoring and measurement results, audit results, and fulfilment of information security objectives.
Reviews shall consider feedback from interested parties.
Reviews shall consider results of risk assessment and status of risk treatment plan.
Reviews shall consider opportunities for continual improvement.
The outputs of the Information Security steering committee review shall include decisions related to continual improvement opportunities and any needs for changes to the information security management system.
(client) shall retain documented information as evidence of the results of the Information Security steering committee reviews.
(client) shall continually improve the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the information security management system.
When a nonconformity occurs, (client) shall react to the nonconformity, and as applicable take action to control and correct it and deal with the consequences.
"When a nonconformity occurs, (client) shall evaluate the need for action to eliminate the causes of nonconformity, in order that it does not recur or occur elsewhere, by:
1) reviewing the nonconformity;
2) determining the causes of the nonconformity; 
3) determining if similar nonconformities exist, or could potentially occur."
When a nonconformity occurs, (client) shall implement any action needed.
When a nonconformity occurs, (client)shall review the effectiveness of any corrective action taken.
When a nonconformity occurs, (client) shall make changes to the information security management system, if necessary.
Corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered.
(client) shall retain documented information as evidence of the nature of the nonconformities and any subsequent actions taken, and the results of any corrective action.
At the highest level, (client) shall define an Information Security Policy Manual which is defined and documented by the Information Security function, approved by management and which sets out (client)’s approach to managing its information security objectives.
This Information Security Policy Manual takes into account the business strategy.
This Information Security Policy Manual takes into account regulations, legislation, and contracts.
This Information Security Policy Manual takes into account the current and projected information security threat environment.
This Information Security Policy Manual contains statements concerning the definition of information security, as well as objectives and principles to guide all activities related to information security.
This Information Security Policy Manual contains statements regarding the assignment of general and specific responsibilities for information security management to defined roles.
This Information Security Policy Manual contains statements regarding the processes for handling deviations and exceptions.
At a lower level, this Information Security Policy Manual is supported by topic-specific policies, which further mandate the implementation of information security controls and are typically structured to address the needs of certain target groups within (client) or to cover certain topics.
This Information Security Policy Manual is communicated to employees and relevant external parties in a form that is relevant, accessible and understandable to the intended reader.
This Information Security Policy Manual ensures that the information security policies and procedures are implemented.
This Information Security Policy Manual is supported by Information Security procedures and technical security standards (e.g., operating systems, databases and firewall technical security standards).
Those information security policies and procedures are reviewed periodically according to planned intervals or upon changes to related laws and regulations. Changes and reviews are approved and documented.
This Information Security Policy Manual is reviewed periodically according to planned intervals or upon changes to related laws and regulations. Changes and reviews are documented and approved by Management.
This Information Security Policy Manual review includes assessing opportunities for improvement of (client)’s policies and approach to managing information security in response to changes to organizational environment, business circumstances, legal conditions or technical environment.
The Information Security Policy Manual review takes the results of management reviews into account.
Management approval for a revised Information Security Policy Manual shall be obtained.
(client) shall assign information security roles and responsibilities in alignment with the overarching information security policy and relevant topic-specific policies.
(client) shall define and assign information security roles and responsibilities based on its specific needs.
(client) shall establish, document, and maintain clear roles and responsibilities for protecting information and associated assets.
(client) shall define, document, and assign responsibilities for implementing and maintaining specific information security processes.
(client) shall define, document, and assign clear roles and responsibilities for information security risk management activities, including the acceptance of residual risks by designated risk owners.
(client) shall establish and communicate documented information security responsibilities for all personnel who utilize its information and associated assets.
(client) shall supplement information security responsibilities with additional, site-specific and facility-specific guidance as necessary.
(client) shall allow individuals with allocated information security responsibilities to delegate specific tasks, while retaining accountability and ensuring delegated tasks are performed correctly.
(client) shall clearly define, document, and effectively communicate information security responsibilities for each individual's area of responsibility.
(client) shall establish and document clear authorization levels for accessing and managing information assets.
(client) shall ensure individuals assigned information security roles possess the necessary knowledge and skills, and receive ongoing support to maintain competency in fulfilling their responsibilities and staying abreast of relevant developments.
(client) shall implement segregation of duties by dividing conflicting information security responsibilities among different individuals to prevent unauthorized actions.
(client) shall identify and establish segregation of duties and areas of responsibility based on organizational requirements.
(client) shall consider the potential for collusion when designing segregation of duties controls to effectively mitigate the risk of unauthorized actions.
(client) shall implement compensating controls when complete segregation of duties is not feasible. These controls may include, but are not limited to, activity monitoring, audit trails, and management oversight, to mitigate the associated risks of unauthorized actions.
(client) shall implement a process to prevent the assignment of conflicting information security roles to individuals, thereby mitigating the risk of unauthorized actions.
(client)'s senior management shall actively demonstrate their commitment and support for the information security policy, associated topic-specific policies and procedures, and implemented information security controls.
(client) shall ensure that personnel are thoroughly briefed on their information security roles and responsibilities before granting access to (client)'s information and associated assets. This briefing shall be aligned with the individuals' specific roles and access levels.
(client) shall ensure all personnel are provided with clear guidelines outlining the information security expectations associated with their roles. This includes, but is not limited to, acceptable use policies, data classification procedures, and reporting requirements.
(client)'s management shall ensure that all personnel are compelled to comply with the Information Security Policy and relevant topic-specific policies. This includes establishing mechanisms to verify compliance and enforce established consequences for non-compliance.
(client)'s management shall ensure all personnel receive information security awareness training relevant to their specific roles and responsibilities within (client). This training shall equip them with the knowledge and understanding necessary to fulfill their information security obligations effectively.
(client)'s management shall hold all personnel accountable for complying with the terms and conditions of their employment, contracts, or agreements. This includes adherence to (client)'s information security policy, relevant topic-specific policies, and established methods of working that promote information security best practices.
(client)'s management shall ensure ongoing professional education and development opportunities are provided to all personnel to maintain and enhance their information security skills and qualifications relevant to their roles and responsibilities. This ensures a consistently informed and capable workforce equipped to protect (client)'s information assets.
(client)'s management shall establish and maintain a confidential reporting mechanism (e.g., whistleblower hotline), where practicable, for personnel to report suspected violations of the information security policy, topic-specific policies, or information security procedures. This mechanism shall be clearly communicated and readily accessible to all personnel, promoting a culture of open communication and encouraging timely reporting of potential security risks.
(client)'s management shall ensure all personnel are provided with adequate resources and project planning time to effectively implement and maintain (client)'s security-related processes and controls. This includes allocating necessary resources, such as budget, tools, and training, and incorporating security considerations into project planning to ensure efficient and successful implementation of security measures.
(client) shall identify and establish channels of communication with relevant authorities, such as law enforcement agencies and regulatory bodies, to facilitate the timely reporting of information security incidents, sharing of threat intelligence, and seeking expert guidance in the event of security concerns.
"(client) shall develop a clear policy outlining:
When: Specific situations requiring contact with relevant authorities (e.g., law enforcement, regulators).
Who: Authorized personnel designated to contact specific authorities."
(client) shall establish and maintain a documented procedure for the timely reporting of identified information security incidents
(client) shall utilize established communication channels with relevant authorities to gain insights into current and anticipated information security regulations and expectations.
(client) shall establish and maintain contact with relevant security-focused organizations, including special interest groups, specialist security forums, and professional associations, to stay informed about current trends, best practices, and potential threats in the information security landscape.
"Participating in special interest groups (SIGs) should be considered as a means to: 
a)	Enhance knowledge & awareness of best practices, emerging threats, and evolving security landscapes.
b)	Maintain a comprehensive understanding of the information security environment and potential threats.
c)	Gain access to timely security information and expert guidance.
d)	Engage in information sharing & exchange on new technologies, threats, and vulnerabilities.
e)	Establish potential liaison points for information security incident response."
(client) shall implement a continuous threat intelligence program that involves the continuous collection, analysis, and dissemination of threat intelligence for informed decision-making and preventative measures.
The threat intelligence program should provide means to proactively mitigate and minimize the potential impact of existing and emerging threats on (client)’s information assets.
"(client) shall consider the following layers in the threat intelligence program:
a) strategic threat intelligence: exchange of high-level information about the changing threat
landscape (e.g. types of attackers or types of attacks).
b) tactical threat intelligence: information about attacker methodologies, tools and technologies
involved.
c) operational threat intelligence: details about specific attacks, including technical indicators."
Threat intelligence should be relevant (i.e. related to the protection of (client)).
Threat intelligence should be insightful (i.e. providing (client) with an accurate and detailed understanding of the threat landscape).
Threat intelligence should be contextual, to provide situational awareness (i.e. adding context to the information based on the time of events, where they occur, previous experiences and prevalence in similar organizations).
Threat intelligence should be actionable (i.e. (client) can act on information quickly and effectively).
Threat intelligence activities should establish objectives for threat intelligence production.
Threat intelligence activities should identify, vet and select internal and external information sources that are necessary and appropriate to provide information required for the production of threat intelligence
Threat intelligence activities should collect information from selected sources, which can be internal and external
Threat intelligence activities should process information collected to prepare it for analysis (e.g. by translating, formatting or corroborating information).
Threat intelligence activities should analyze information to understand how it relates and is meaningful to (client).
Threat intelligence activities should communicate and share intelligence to relevant individuals in a format that can be understood.
(client) shall implement processes to include information gathered from threat intelligence sources into (client)’s information security risk management processes.
Threat intelligence shall be used as additional input to technical preventive and detective controls like firewalls, intrusion detection system, or anti malware solutions.
Threat intelligence shall be used as input to the information security test processes and techniques.
(client) should share threat intelligence with other organizations on a mutual basis in order to improve overall threat intelligence.
(client) shall integrate information security considerations into all project management processes to ensure that information security risks are identified, assessed, and addressed throughout the entire project lifecycle.
(client) shall integrate information security considerations into all project management processes, regardless of project complexity, size, duration, discipline, or application area (e.g., core business process, ICT, facility management, or other supporting processes), to ensure that information security risks are identified, assessed, and addressed throughout the entire project lifecycle.
(client) shall implement a project management framework that mandates the early and ongoing assessment and mitigation of information security risks throughout the entire project lifecycle.
(client) shall implement a project management methodology requiring the identification and integration of information security requirements, including application security, intellectual property compliance, and any other relevant security needs, during the project planning stages.
(client) shall ensure that all project management processes incorporate the identification, assessment, and mitigation of information security risks associated with project execution throughout the entire project lifecycle.
(client) shall implement a project management methodology that mandates the continuous review and evaluation of information security risk treatment plans.
(client) shall establish defined review points throughout project lifecycles, where designated personnel or governance bodies will evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of implemented information security measures.
(client) shall define and assign clear information security responsibilities and authorities to specific roles involved in project management. To ensure accountability for implementing, maintaining, and monitoring information security controls throughout the project lifecycle.
(client) shall utilize a combination of established information security policies, topic-specific policies, and relevant regulations to define information security requirements for products or services delivered by projects.
(client) shall leverage various information security activities, including threat modeling, incident reviews, vulnerability threshold analysis, and contingency planning, to inform and continuously refine information security requirements.
(client) shall integrate information security considerations into all project types, regardless of their nature.
(client) shall conduct assessments for all projects, considering the types of information involved, the corresponding information security needs to protect it, and the potential negative business impact resulting from inadequate security.
(client) shall conduct assessments for all projects, considering the confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) requirements of information and associated assets involved.
(client) shall consider the required level of confidence in entity identities when determining appropriate authentication mechanisms for project resources and information.
(client) shall implement comprehensive access controls that defines processes for provisioning and authorization. This framework will consider the specific needs of various user groups, including customers, potential business users, privileged or technical users, operations staff, and external suppliers
(client) shall ensure that, as part of the project onboarding process, users are provided with clear information about their information security duties and responsibilities, aligned with their specific roles and access privileges.
(client) shall ensure that, as part of the project onboarding process, information security requirements are aligned with the business processes, such as transaction logging and monitoring, nonrepudiation requirements.
(client) shall consider the interoperability and integration of information security controls throughout the project lifecycle. This includes assessing compatibility with existing controls.
(client) shall ensure alignment with relevant legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual obligations that govern (client)'s operations and the information assets involved in the project.
for all projects involving external parties (client) shall considering the level of confidence or assurance required in their ability to meet (client)'s information security policies, topic-specific policies, and relevant security clauses within any agreements or contracts.
(client) shall establish and maintain an asset inventory to identify and categorize all information assets and associated assets, along with their classification based on criticality for information security.
Documentation related to information assets and their security classifications shall be maintained within dedicated or existing inventories, as deemed appropriate.
(client) shall ensure inventory of information assets and associated assets is accurate, up-to-date, and consistent, ensuring alignment with other relevant inventories whenever possible.
"(client) shall implement a comprehensive asset management process to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of its inventory of information and associated assets. This process will incorporate one or both of the following approaches:
•	Regular reviews: Conduct periodic reviews of identified assets against the inventory to verify accuracy and identify any changes or additions.
•	Automated updates: Utilize automated mechanisms to update the inventory in real-time upon the installation, modification, or removal of assets."
(client)'s information asset inventory shall capture relevant information for each asset, including its location when appropriate, to facilitate effective management and risk mitigation strategies.
(client) shall implement an integrated asset management approach utilizing either a single, comprehensive inventory or a set of interlinked, dynamic inventories, as deemed appropriate,
(client) shall implement information classification and asset categorization procedures such that the security classification of each asset is determined based on the level of confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) required for the information it processes, stores, or transmits.
The asset inventory shall be maintained with a granularity level aligned to its specific needs and risk profile.
For each asset in the asset inventory, (client) shall assign ownership to a designated individual or group.
(client) shall establish a process for the timely assignment and ongoing management of ownership for all information and associated assets within its inventory.
(client) shall implement a process for assigning ownership of information and associated assets upon creation or acquisition, and ensuring the timely update of ownership records when such assets are transferred within (client).
(client) shall establish a clear asset ownership model where designated individuals or groups are held accountable for the proper management of their assigned information and associated assets throughout the entire lifecycle.
The asset owners are responsible for ensuring accurate and timely information regarding their assigned assets is captured and maintained within (client)'s inventory.
Asset owners are responsible for ensuring the appropriate classification and application of security controls to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of their assigned assets and their associated information throughout the entire lifecycle.
(client) shall require asset owners of technology assets to maintain a complete inventory of all associated components, including but not limited to databases, storage systems, software components, and sub-components.
Asset owners are responsible for establishing and enforcing clear and documented requirements for the acceptable use of their assigned assets.
Asset owners are responsible for establishing, maintaining and reviewing proportionate and effective access controls
(client) shall mandate secure disposal procedures for information and associated assets upon deletion or disposition
(client) shall mandate that designated asset owners actively participate in identifying, assessing, and mitigating risks associated with their assigned information and associated assets throughout the entire lifecycle.
(client) shall ensure that designated asset owners are responsible for facilitating and supporting the individuals and teams entrusted with managing the information associated with their assigned assets
While tasks and responsibilities may be delegated (e.g., to custodians overseeing daily asset management), ultimate accountability for the delegated tasks and associated outcomes remains with the original delegator.
(client) shall provide information security awareness training to all personnel and external party users granted access to (client)'s information and associated assets. This training shall outline their responsibilities for protecting and handling such information and assets in accordance with organizational security requirements.
(client) shall hold all personnel and external party users accountable for their use of any information processing facilities, including adherence to established security practices and responsible handling of information assets.
(client) shall establish a clear and comprehensive Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) that defines the acceptable use of information and other associated assets. This policy shall outline the expectations for responsible use, data protection, and security practices for all personnel and authorized users.
(client) shall effectively communicate the Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) to all personnel and external party users who access or handle (client)'s information and associated assets. This communication may involve multiple methods.
(client)'s Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) shall provide clear and specific guidance on the expected behavior of individuals when using or handling information and other associated assets.
(client)'s Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) shall explicitly outline expected and unacceptable behaviors of individuals from an information security perspective.
(client)'s Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) shall explicitly define the permitted and prohibited uses of information and other associated assets.
(client) may conduct monitoring activities of its information systems and resources to ensure compliance with this Acceptable Use Policy, protect (client)'s legitimate business interests, and investigate potential security incidents. The specific methods and scope of monitoring may be adjusted as needed, and users should be aware that their activities may be subject to monitoring.
"(client) shall establish and implement comprehensive acceptable use procedures encompassing the entire information lifecycle, aligned with the classification of information and associated risk levels. These procedures shall address:
•	Access controls
•	User authorization records
•	Copy protection
•	Asset storage
•	Media marking
•	Disposal authorization "
(client) shall extend the scope of acceptable use procedures to encompass the use of third-party assets and any associated organizational information or software utilized in conjunction with such external assets. This includes, but is not limited to, public cloud services.
(client) shall require all personnel and other interested parties to return all organizational assets in their possession upon change or termination of employment, contract, or agreement.
(client) shall establish a formalized change or termination process that explicitly includes the return of all previously issued physical and electronic assets owned by or entrusted to (client).
(client) shall implement procedures to ensure proper data handling when personnel or other parties purchase organizational equipment or use their personal devices for work purposes. These procedures shall include securing, transferring, and securely deleting all relevant organizational information.
(client) shall establish a process for personnel with knowledge critical to ongoing operations to document and transfer such knowledge to (client) before or during the notice period.
(client) shall implement measures to prevent unauthorized copying of sensitive information (e.g., intellectual property) by personnel under notice of termination, both during the notice period and thereafter.
"(client) shall maintain a clear and documented inventory of all information and associated assets subject to return, including but not limited to:
•	User endpoint devices
•	Portable storage devices
•	Specialist equipment
•	Authentication hardware (e.g., keys, tokens, smartcards)
•	Physical copies of information"
(client) shall acknowledge the challenges associated with returning information stored on non-owned assets. In such cases, (client) shall implement alternative information security controls, such as access rights management or encryption, to restrict unauthorized access and usage.
(client) shall classify information based on its security needs, considering confidentiality, integrity, availability, relevant stakeholder requirements, and legal obligations.
(client) shall establish a clear information classification policy and effectively communicate it to all relevant stakeholders.
(client) shall design the classification scheme to consider and address confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements of information.
(client) shall develop classification levels and associated controls that balance business needs for information sharing, protection of information integrity and availability, and relevant legal requirements.
(client) shall extend information classification principles to classify assets (other than information) that store, process, handle, or protect classified information.
(client) shall hold information owners accountable for its proper classification.
(client) shall implement a process for reviewing and updating information classification throughout its lifecycle based on changes in its value, sensitivity, and criticality.
(client) shall ensure the classification scheme aligns with the access control policy and addresses specific organizational business needs.
(client) shall define classification levels based on the potential impact of information compromise to the organization, using clear and meaningful names within the context of the scheme.
(client) shall implement a consistent classification scheme across the organization and document it within procedures to ensure everyone classifies information and associated assets consistently.
(client) shall establish procedures for agreements with other organizations exchanging information, addressing classification identification, interpretation, and potential scheme differences.
(Client) shall develop and implement information labelling procedures aligned with the established information classification scheme, encompassing all information and associated assets in various formats.
(Client) shall utilize clear and consistent labelling methods that reflect the classification scheme and are readily identifiable across all formats (physical, electronic, etc.).
(Client) shall define specific locations and instructions for label application, considering information access methods (e.g., headers, footers) and asset handling requirements depending on the storage media.
(Client) shall establish procedures for modifying or removing labels when declassifying information, ensuring the process doesn't compromise remaining information.
(Client) shall define justified exceptions to labeling (e.g., non-confidential information) to optimize resource allocation while maintaining security.
(Client) shall determine how to label information electronically, physically, or in any other format, including information sent or stored.
(Client) shall establish procedures for addressing information that cannot be labeled due to technical limitations, outlining alternative security measures.
(Client) shall leverage metadata in digital information for identification, management, and control, particularly regarding confidentiality and efficient information search.
(Client) shall define how to attach metadata, choose appropriate labels, and manage associated data, aligning with the information model and ICT architecture, enabling systems to interact and make decisions based on classification labels.
(Client) shall empower systems to add relevant metadata during information processing, reflecting its security properties.
(Client) shall raise awareness and provide training on labeling procedures to ensure personnel correctly label and handle information.
(Client) shall ensure that system outputs containing sensitive or critical information carry appropriate classification labels.
(client) shall establish rules, procedures, or agreements for all information transfer methods within (client) and with external parties.
(client) shall establish and communicate a comprehensive information transfer policy to all relevant stakeholders, outlining the procedures to protect information in transit.
(client) shall implement information transfer controls (including access control, encryption, non-repudiation) commensurate with the classification of information and any specific sensitivity requirements.
(client) shall establish and maintain transfer agreements (including recipient authentication) with third parties to protect information in all forms, defining responsibilities and liabilities in case of incidents.
(client) shall utilize an agreed-upon labeling system for sensitive information and implement secure methods (e.g., encryption) for electronic transfers.
(client) shall ensure the reliability and availability of chosen information transfer services.
(client) shall establish a policy outlining acceptable use of information transfer facilities (including electronic communication channels).
(client) shall define guidelines for retaining and disposing of business records, including messages, related to information transfer.
(client) shall consider and address legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual requirements related to information transfer (e.g., electronic signatures).
(client) shall implement measures to detect and protect against malware transmission through electronic communication.
(client) shall implement controls to protect sensitive electronic information transmitted as attachments.
(client) shall establish procedures to prevent sending messages or documents to incorrect recipients.
(client) shall require prior approval before using external public services like instant messaging, social networking, file sharing, or cloud storage.
(client) shall utilize stronger authentication methods when transferring information over publicly accessible networks.
(client) shall implement restrictions on electronic communication facilities (e.g., preventing automatic email forwarding).
(client) shall advise personnel against sending confidential information via SMS or instant messaging due to potential interception and storage on unsecure devices.
(client) shall inform personnel and interested parties about the risks associated with using fax machines or services.
(client) shall define responsibilities for controlling, notifying, and transmitting physical media transfers.
(client) shall ensure correct addressing, secure transportation, and appropriate packaging (meeting minimum technical standards) to protect physical media during transit.
(client) shall maintain a list of approved and reliable couriers, establish identification standards, and utilize tamper-evident controls based on information classification.
(client) shall maintain logs recording the content, protection applied, authorized recipients, and transfer times for physical media transfers.
(client) shall remind personnel and interested parties to avoid confidential conversations in public places or insecure communication channels.
(client) shall advise against leaving confidential voicemail messages due to potential unauthorized access.
(client) shall ensure appropriate screening of personnel authorized to listen to sensitive conversations.
(client) shall ensure sound-proofing and closed doors for sensitive verbal communication.
(client) shall recommend starting sensitive conversations with disclaimers regarding the classification and handling requirements of the information being discussed.
(client) shall establish and implement access control rules for physical and logical access to information and associated assets, based on business and information security needs.
(client) shall assign information owners the responsibility to determine security and business requirements for access control of their associated information and assets.
(client) shall define a comprehensive access control policy, considering the identified requirements, and communicate it to all relevant parties.
(client) shall define and map access rights and restrictions to relevant entities (users, machines, etc.) based on established access control rules.
(client) shall ensure consistency between access rights and information classification.
(client) shall ensure consistency between access rights and physical security needs.
(client) shall ensure considering all connections in distributed environments for authorized access.
(client) shall ensure reflecting elements relevant to dynamic access control.
(client) shall implement the need-to-know principle to grant access only to information required for specific tasks.
(client) shall implement the need-to-use to assign access to IT infrastructure only when a clear need exists.
(client) shall implement access control based on "least privilege" principles.
(client) shall consider changes in information labels and user permissions (automated or manual).
(client) shall define and regularly review access control rule approval processes.
(client) shall support access control with documented procedures and clearly defined responsibilities.
(client) may implement various access control methods (e.g., MAC, DAC, RBAC, ABAC) based on specific needs.
(client) shall manage the full lifecycle of identities, including creation, activation, modification, deactivation, and deletion.
(client) shall ensure that, for human identities, one identity is linked to a single individual for accountability purposes.
(client) shall only allow shared identities for business or operational reasons, subject to dedicated approval and documentation.
(client) shall implement segregated approval with ongoing oversight for identities assigned to non-human entities.
(client) shall deactivate or remove identities promptly when no longer needed due to entity deletion, disuse, or personnel changes.
(client) shall prevent duplicate identities within the same domain by ensuring a single identity maps to a single entity.
(client) shall maintain records of significant events concerning user identity and authentication information use and management.
(client) shall establish processes to handle changes in user identity information, including re-verification of trusted documents (if applicable).
(client) shall ensure adequate trust level and risk mitigation when using third-party provided identities (e.g., social media credentials).
(client)’s process for identity management shall confirm business justification for identity creation.
(client)’s process for identity management shall verify entity identity before assigning a logical identity.
(client)’s process for identity management shall configure and activate the identity, including related authentication services.
(client)’s process for identity management shall provide or revoke specific access rights based on authorization decisions.
(client) shall establish a controlled process for allocating and managing authentication information, including advising personnel on proper handling practices.
(client) shall ensure unique and non-guessable temporary passwords are generated automatically and changed by users after first use.
(client) shall ensure user identity verification before providing new, replacement, or temporary authentication information.
(client) shall ensure secure transmission of authentication information (e.g., encrypted channels) and avoidance of unprotected email.
(client) shall ensure user acknowledgment of receiving authentication information.
(client) shall ensure immediate changes to default authentication information upon system or software installation.
(client) shall ensure maintenance of confidential and approved records of significant events concerning authentication information allocation and management.
(client) shall require all personnel maintain confidentiality of personal authentication information and share it only with authorized personnel for shared identities or non-personal entities.
(client) shall require all personnel immediately change compromised authentication information upon notification.
(client) shall require all personnel select strong passwords based on best practices (e.g., avoid personal information, dictionary words, use passphrases, minimum length, avoid reuse).
(client) shall require all personnel avoid using the same password for multiple services and systems.
(client) shall require all personnel acknowledge the obligation to follow these rules through employment terms and conditions.
(client)’s password management system should allow users to select and confirm strong passwords.
(client)’s password management system should enforce strong password requirements.
(client)’s password management system should require password changes at first login.
(client)’s password management system should enforce password changes in case of security incidents, terminations, or when users know passwords for active shared identities.
(client)’s password management system should prevent password reuse.
(client)’s password management system should prevent use of common passwords and compromised credentials.
(client)’s password management system should hide passwords during entry.
(client)’s password management system should store and transmit passwords in a protected form.
(client) shall utilize approved cryptographic techniques for password encryption and hashing.
(client) shall manage access rights to information and associated assets in accordance with the established access control policy and rules.
"(client) shall implement a secure access rights provisioning process that considers:
•	Owner authorization for access to information and assets.
•	Business needs, access control policies, and segregation of duties.
•	Timely removal of access for inactive users, particularly departed personnel.
•	Issuing temporary access with defined expiration dates for specific situations.
•	Verification of access level alignment with policies and security requirements.
•	Activation of access rights only after successful authorization."
(client) shall maintain a centralized record of access rights granted to users for accessing information and associated assets.
(client) shall adjust access rights for users who experience changes in roles or responsibilities.
"(client) shall conduct regular reviews of physical and logical access rights, considering:
•	User access changes within (client) (job changes, termination).
•	Authorizations for privileged access."
(client) shall review and adjust or revoke a user's access rights before any change or termination of employment, considering relevant risk factors.
(client) may establish user access roles based on business needs, grouping access rights into profiles for efficient management.
(client) may consider including clauses in contracts that address unauthorized access attempts.
(client) shall be aware of potential risks associated with personnel leaving (client) and implement appropriate mitigation strategies.
(client) may use access cloning, but shall do so cautiously based on distinct roles, avoiding excessive access grants.
(client) shall establish and implement processes to manage information security risks associated with supplier products and services, including cloud providers.
(client) shall establish and communicate a dedicated Information Security in Supplier Relationships policy to all relevant personnel.
(client) shall identify and document types of suppliers impacting information security (e.g., ICT, utilities).
(client) shall evaluate and select suppliers based on information sensitivity and established criteria (e.g., market analysis, references, reviews, certifications).
(client) shall define information, ICT services, and physical infrastructure accessible to suppliers.
(client) shall define types of ICT infrastructure components impacting information security.
(client) shall manage information security risks related to supplier access to information, potential malicious intent and product malfunctions or vulnerabilities (including software components).
(client) shall monitor compliance with information security requirements for each supplier and access type.
(client) shall mitigate identified supplier non-compliance.
(client) shall develop incident and contingency plans for supplier-related issues, outlining responsibilities.
(client) shall ensure supplier information processing and availability through resilience and contingency measures.
(client) shall provide awareness and training to personnel interacting with suppliers regarding appropriate engagement rules, relevant policies, processes, and procedures and secure behavior based on supplier access level.
(client) shall implement secure processes for transferring information and assets during the supplier relationship.
"(client) shall implement secure processes for terminating the supplier relationship that includes:
•	Deprovisioning access rights.
•	Handling information securely.
•	Managing intellectual property ownership.
•	Facilitating information portability if applicable.
•	Maintaining records management.
•	Returning assets.
•	Disposing of information and assets securely.
•	Enforcing ongoing confidentiality requirements."
(client) shall establish expectations for supplier personnel security and physical security measures.
(client) shall consider procedures for continued information processing if a supplier is unable to provide services (e.g., identifying alternative suppliers).
(client) shall consider control guidance when choosing suppliers and their products or services.
(client) shall implement compensating controls based on risk assessments when control over suppliers is limited.
(client) shall implement additional controls based on specific requirements, such as non-disclosure agreements or cryptographic techniques for highly confidential information, and consider legal and contractual responsibilities related to information protection.
(client) shall establish and agree upon information security requirements with each supplier, based on the type of supplier relationship.
(client) shall establish and document supplier agreements to ensure clear understanding of information security obligations for both parties.
(client) shall include a description of information access and provision methods in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include information classification based on (client)'s scheme in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include mapping between (client)'s and supplier's classification schemes in supplier agreements, if applicable.
(client) shall include legal, statutory, and contractual requirements, including data protection, in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include a requirement for both parties to implement an agreed-upon set of controls (access control, performance review, monitoring, reporting, auditing) in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include rules of acceptable and unacceptable information and asset use in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include procedures for authorizing and removing supplier personnel access in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include information security requirements for the supplier's ICT infrastructure in supplier agreements.
(client) may include indemnification and remediation clauses for supplier non-compliance in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include incident management requirements (notification, collaboration) in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include training and awareness requirements for specific procedures and security in supplier agreements.
(client) may include provisions for subcontracting, including controls and notifications, in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include a designated information security contact person in supplier agreements.
(client) may include permissible supplier personnel screening, responsibilities, and notification procedures in supplier agreements, where legally permissible.
(client) may include requirements for third-party attestation evidence and reports on control effectiveness in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include the right to audit supplier processes and controls related to the agreement in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include a requirement for the supplier's report on control effectiveness and corrective action agreement in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include defect and conflict resolution processes in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include backup provision aligned with (client)'s needs in supplier agreements.
(client) may include requirements for alternate facility availability for disaster recovery and fallback controls in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include a change management process with advance notification and potential rejection in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include physical security controls based on information classification in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include information transfer controls for physical and logical transmission in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include termination clauses covering records, asset return, disposal, and confidentiality in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include a method for securely destroying organization information upon contract termination in supplier agreements.
(client) shall include provisions for handover support to another supplier or (client) at contract end in supplier agreements.
(client) shall establish and maintain a register of external party agreements, regularly reviewing, validating, and updating them to ensure continued relevance and security effectiveness.
(client) shall define and implement processes and procedures to manage information security risks associated with the ICT products and services supply chain.
(client) shall define information security requirements for acquiring ICT products or services.
(client) shall require ICT service suppliers to propagate (client)'s security requirements to subcontractors providing parts of the service.
(client) shall require ICT product suppliers to implement appropriate security practices throughout their supply chain if their products include third-party components.
(client) shall request information from ICT product suppliers describing the software components used in their products.
(client) shall request information from ICT product suppliers describing their product's security functions and secure operation configuration.
(client) shall implement a monitoring process and acceptable methods to validate that delivered ICT products and services comply with stated security requirements (e.g., penetration testing, third-party attestations).
(client) shall identify and document critical product or service components, implementing additional scrutiny and follow-up, especially when outsourced by the supplier.
(client) shall obtain assurance that critical components and their origin can be traced throughout the supply chain.
(client) shall obtain assurance that delivered ICT products function as expected and lack unexpected features.
(client) shall implement processes to ensure components from suppliers are genuine and unaltered (e.g., anti-tamper labels, cryptographic hashing, digital signatures).
(client) may require ICT products to achieve specific security levels through formal certifications or evaluation schemes.
(client) shall define rules for sharing information regarding the supply chain and potential issues among (client) and suppliers.
(client) shall implement specific processes for managing the ICT component life cycle, availability, and associated security risks, including identifying alternative suppliers and knowledge transfer strategies.
(client) shall collaborate with suppliers to understand the ICT supply chain and its impact on information security.
(client) shall acquire ICT from reputable sources, considering vendor reputation as an indicator of quality control.
(client) shall treat cloud services as part of the ICT supply chain.
(client) shall regularly monitor, review, evaluate, and manage changes in supplier information security practices and service delivery.
(client) shall ensure compliance with information security terms and conditions in supplier agreements, proper management of information security incidents and problems, and minimal service disruption due to changes in supplier services or business status.
(client) shall monitor service performance levels to verify compliance with supplier agreements.
"(client) shall monitor the following supplier changes:
•	Enhancements to existing services
•	Development of new applications and systems
•	Modifications or updates to supplier policies and procedures
•	New or changed controls for information security incidents and improvements"
"(client) shall monitor the following service changes:
•	Network changes and enhancements
•	Use of new technologies
•	Adoption of new products or newer versions
•	New development tools and environments
•	Changes to physical location of service facilities
•	Sub-supplier changes
•	Subcontracting to another supplier"
(client) shall review service reports from suppliers and arrange meetings as required by agreements.
(client) may conduct audits of suppliers and sub-suppliers, review independent auditor reports (if available), and follow up on identified issues.
(client) shall provide information about information security incidents and review this information as required by agreements and relevant guidelines.
(client) shall review supplier audit trails and records of information security events, operational problems, failures, fault tracing, and service disruptions.
(client) shall respond to and manage any identified information security events or incidents.
(client) shall identify and manage information security vulnerabilities.
(client) may review the information security aspects of the supplier's relationships with its own suppliers.
(client) shall ensure suppliers maintain sufficient service capability and workable plans for maintaining agreed service continuity levels during major failures or disasters (refer to relevant sections).
(client) shall ensure suppliers assign responsibilities for reviewing compliance and enforcing agreement requirements.
(client) shall regularly evaluate that suppliers maintain adequate information security levels.
(client) shall assign responsibility for managing supplier relationships to a designated individual or team with sufficient technical skills and resources to monitor compliance, particularly information security requirements, and address service delivery deficiencies.
(client) shall establish processes for the secure acquisition, use, management, and termination of cloud services, ensuring alignment with its information security requirements.
(client) shall establish and communicate a comprehensive policy on the use of cloud services, clearly defining expectations for all relevant stakeholders.
(client) shall define and communicate a comprehensive strategy for managing information security risks associated with cloud services. This strategy may leverage existing practices for managing services provided by external parties.
(client) shall define all relevant information security requirements associated with the use of cloud services.
(client) shall define cloud service selection criteria and the defined scope of cloud service usage.
(client) shall define roles and responsibilities related to the use and management of cloud services.
(client) shall define which information security controls are managed by the cloud service provider and which are managed by (client) as the cloud service customer.
(client) shall define how to obtain and utilize information security capabilities provided by the cloud service provider.
(client) shall define how to obtain assurance on information security controls implemented by cloud service providers.
(client) shall define how to manage controls, interfaces and changes in services when an organization uses multiple cloud services, particularly from different cloud service providers.
(client) shall define procedures for handling information security incidents that occur in relation to the use of cloud services.
(client) shall define its approach for monitoring, reviewing and evaluating the ongoing use of cloud services to manage information security risks.
(client) shall define how to change or stop the use of cloud services including exit strategies for cloud services.
(client) shall conduct a thorough review of cloud service agreements with providers to ensure they explicitly address (client)'s confidentiality, integrity, availability, and information handling requirements, along with establishing appropriate service level objectives.
(client) shall undertake comprehensive risk assessments to identify and evaluate the inherent risks associated with utilizing cloud services. Management approval must be obtained for any residual risks identified.
Cloud service agreements shall require the provider to adhere to industry-accepted standards for cloud service architecture and infrastructure.
Cloud service agreements shall require the provider to implement access controls that meet (client)'s specific requirements.
Cloud service agreements shall require the provider to deploy and actively monitor solutions designed to detect and prevent malware threats.
Cloud service agreements shall specify that sensitive information is processed and stored in pre-approved locations (e.g., specific countries or regions) or within a defined jurisdiction.
Cloud service agreements shall ensure the provision of dedicated support in the event of an information security incident within the cloud service environment.
Cloud service agreements shall ensure that (client)'s information security requirements are maintained even if cloud services are further sub-contracted (or a prohibition on sub-contracting altogether).
Cloud service agreements shall require the provider to support (client) in gathering digital evidence, considering legal and regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions.
Cloud service agreements shall ensure the provision of appropriate service availability and support throughout (client)'s exit from the cloud service.
Cloud service agreements shall require the implementation of a robust data and configuration information backup and management strategy, tailored to the capabilities of the chosen cloud service provider.
Cloud service agreements shall ensure the ability to obtain and return information owned by (client), such as configuration files, source code, and data, upon request throughout the service provision period or upon termination of service.
(client) may consider incorporating a clause within cloud service agreements requiring providers to provide advance notification for any substantial changes that could impact (client).
(client) shall maintain consistent communication channels with cloud service providers to facilitate a continuous exchange of information regarding information security. This includes establishing mechanisms for both the cloud service provider and (client) to monitor service characteristics and report any deviations from the commitments outlined within the agreements.
(client) shall plan and establish information security incident management processes, clearly defining roles and responsibilities for both internal and external stakeholders.
(client) shall establish incident management processes encompassing reporting methods, administration, documentation, detection, triage, prioritization, analysis, communication, and coordination with interested parties.
(client) shall develop and implement an incident response process, ensuring competency of personnel handling information security incidents through proper documentation and periodic training.
(client) shall establish a systematic approach for reporting information security events, specifying a common method, including a designated point of contact.
(client) shall identify and implement an incident management plan, including procedures for evaluating events, monitoring, detecting, classifying, analyzing, and reporting incidents based on severity and potential consequences.
(client) shall define objectives for information security incident management in agreement with management, ensuring understanding of priorities and resolution time frames.
(client) shall develop and implement incident management procedures covering evaluation, monitoring, detection, classification, analysis, reporting, incident resolution, response and escalation, coordination with interested parties, logging, evidence handling, root cause analysis, and lessons learned.
(client) shall establish reporting procedures, including actions during an event, incident forms, feedback mechanisms, and creation of incident reports.
(client) shall consider external requirements for incident reporting to relevant interested parties within defined time frames, adhering to regulatory breach notification requirements.
(client) shall recognize the cross-boundary nature of information security incidents and coordinate response efforts, sharing relevant information with external organizations as necessary.
(client) shall establish a process to identify required training, certification, and ongoing professional development for incident response personnel.
(client) shall establish a process to assess information security events and determine if they qualify as incidents.
(client) shall maintain a documented categorization and prioritization scheme for information security incidents, outlining the criteria for identifying consequences and assigning priority.
This documented scheme shall be used to assess all information security events.
Personnel designated to manage information security incidents shall be responsible for conducting the assessment and making the categorization decision.
Detailed records of the assessment, categorization, and decision for each information security event shall be maintained for future reference and verification.
(client) shall implement documented procedures for responding to information security incidents.
(client) shall establish and communicate documented information security incident response procedures to all relevant stakeholders.
(client) shall designate a team with the required expertise to respond to information security incidents.
(client) shall contain the affected systems to prevent the consequences of an incident from spreading.
(client) shall collect evidence related to information security incidents as soon as possible after occurrence.
(client) shall escalate information security incidents as required, including activating crisis management activities and potentially invoking business continuity plans.
(client) shall maintain detailed logs of all information security incident response activities.
(client) shall communicate the existence and relevant details of information security incidents to all necessary internal and external parties based on the need-to-know principle.
(client) shall coordinate with internal and external parties, including authorities, external stakeholders, suppliers, and clients, to enhance response effectiveness and minimize consequences for others.
(client) shall formally close and record information security incidents upon successful resolution.
(client) shall conduct information security forensic analysis when necessary for information security incidents.
(client) shall perform post-incident analysis to identify root causes and document and communicate findings according to established procedures.
(client) shall identify and manage information security vulnerabilities and weaknesses, including those related to controls that caused, contributed to, or failed to prevent the incident.
(client) shall leverage knowledge gained from information security incidents to strengthen and improve information security controls.
(client) shall establish procedures to quantify and monitor the types, volumes, and costs of information security incidents.
(client) shall utilize information gained from information security incident evaluation to enhance the incident management plan, including incident scenarios and procedures.
(client) shall leverage information from information security incident evaluation to identify recurring or serious incidents and their root causes. This information will be used to update (client)'s information security risk assessment and determine and implement additional controls to reduce the likelihood or consequences of similar future incidents.
(client) shall implement mechanisms to collect, quantify, and monitor information about incident types, volumes, and costs to enable learning from incidents.
(client) shall utilize information gained from information security incident evaluation to enhance user awareness and training by providing real-world examples of incidents, proper incident response procedures, and preventative measures.
(client) shall establish and implement a documented procedure for the identification, collection, acquisition, and preservation of digital evidence related to information security incidents.
(client) shall develop and maintain internal procedures for handling information security incident evidence in compliance with legal and disciplinary requirements.
These procedures shall consider the legal landscape of relevant jurisdictions to maximize the admissibility of evidence in court.
The documented evidence management procedures shall provide clear instructions for identifying, collecting, acquiring, and preserving evidence based on the type of storage media, device involved, and its operational state (powered on/off).
(client) shall collect evidence in a manner that ensures admissibility in a court of law or other relevant adjudicatory forum.
"The following principles shall be upheld during evidence collection:
•	Maintain a complete and demonstrably tamper-proof chain of custody for all records.
•	Guarantee the creation of forensically sound copies of electronic evidence.
•	Verify the proper functioning of information systems at the time relevant evidence was recorded."
(client) shall, whenever possible, leverage certified personnel and qualified tools for evidence handling to enhance the defensibility of collected evidence.
For digital evidence that may transcend organizational or jurisdictional boundaries, (client) shall ensure legal authority to collect such evidence.
(client) shall involve legal counsel or law enforcement early in any potential legal action to obtain guidance on the necessary evidence.
(client) shall establish a comprehensive plan to ensure the maintenance of information security at an appropriate level during disruptive events.
This plan shall define (client)'s requirements for adapting information security controls in response to disruptions.
Information security considerations shall be fully integrated into (client)'s existing business continuity management processes.
(client) shall develop, implement, test, review, and evaluate comprehensive plans for maintaining or restoring the security of information for critical business processes following disruptions or failures.
Information security shall be restored to the required level within established timeframes following the resolution of a disruption.
(client) shall incorporate Information security controls into its business continuity and ICT continuity plans.
(client) shall incorporate supporting systems and tools necessary to uphold information security into its business continuity and ICT continuity plans.
(client) shall implement and maintain processes for sustaining existing information security controls during disruptions.
(client) shall implement and maintain compensating controls to address information security controls that cannot be maintained during disruptions.
The consequences of information confidentiality and integrity loss shall be prioritized alongside availability considerations.
(client) shall establish, implement, maintain, and test ICT readiness based on business continuity objectives and identified ICT continuity requirements.
(client) shall integrate ICT readiness into its business continuity management and information security management practices to ensure continued achievement of organizational objectives during disruptions.
(client) shall derive ICT continuity requirements from the business impact analysis (BIA).
The BIA process shall evaluate the impact of business activity disruptions on product and service delivery over time, using impact types and criteria.
The BIA shall prioritize activities based on the magnitude and duration of disruption impact. Recovery Time Objectives (RTOs) shall be assigned to prioritized activities, and the BIA shall determine required resources to support them.
RTOs shall also be established for these resources, including a subset of ICT services.
The BIA involving ICT services may be expanded to define the performance and capacity requirements of ICT systems, as well as Recovery Point Objectives (RPOs) for information needed to support activities during disruptions.
Based on BIA outputs and risk assessments involving ICT services, (client) shall identify and select ICT continuity strategies encompassing pre-disruption, during disruption, and post-disruption considerations.
Business continuity strategies may encompass various solutions. Based on these strategies, plans shall be developed, implemented, and tested to achieve the required availability level for ICT services within established timeframes following critical process interruptions or failures.
(client) shall implement an adequate organizational structure with personnel designated to prepare for, mitigate, and respond to disruptions. This structure shall empower personnel with the necessary responsibility, authority, and competence.
(client) shall conduct regular evaluations of ICT continuity plans, including response and recovery procedures, through exercises and tests to ensure their effectiveness in managing ICT service disruptions.
(client) shall obtain management approval for ICT continuity plans, including response and recovery procedures detailing how ICT service disruptions will be managed.
"ICT continuity plans shall include the following ICT continuity information:
•	Performance and capacity specifications aligned with business continuity requirements and objectives as outlined in the BIA. 
•	RTOs for each prioritized ICT service, along with procedures for restoring service components. 
•	RPOs for prioritized ICT resources defined as information, along with procedures for information restoration. "
(client) shall identify, document, and maintain an up-to-date inventory of legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual requirements relevant to information security and its approach to meeting them.
When developing information security policies and procedures, designing, implementing, or modifying information security controls, (client) shall consider all external requirements, including legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual obligations.
(client) shall classify information and associated assets for internal information security needs or supplier agreements.
(client) shall perform information security risk assessments and determining risk treatment activities.
(client) shall establish processes, roles, and responsibilities related to information security.
(client) shall identify suppliers' contractual information security requirements relevant to (client) and the scope of supplied products and services.
(client) shall identify all legislation and regulations applicable to its information security posture, considering the specific business type.
Using products or services from other countries, or transferring information across borders, compliance with relevant regulations in all affected countries shall be considered.
(client) shall conduct regular reviews of identified legislation and regulations to stay abreast of changes and identify new requirements.
Specific processes and individual responsibilities for meeting these legislative and regulatory requirements shall be defined and documented.
"(client) shall ensure compliance with relevant agreements, laws, and regulations regarding cryptography, including:
•	Restrictions on importing or exporting cryptographic hardware and software.
•	Usage restrictions for cryptography.
•	Mandatory or discretionary access methods for authorities to encrypted information.
•	Validity of digital signatures, seals, and certificates."
(client) shall seek legal advice when dealing with encrypted information or cryptography tools crossing jurisdictional borders.
"(client) shall ensure that contractual requirements related to information security are included in:
•	Client contracts.
•	Supplier contracts.
•	Insurance contracts."
(client) shall establish, implement and communicate a comprehensive policy to protect intellectual property rights.
The policy shall detail procedures for ensuring compliance with intellectual property rights, including the authorized use of software and information products.
To mitigate copyright infringement risks, (client) shall only acquire software from verified and reputable vendors.
An accurate asset register shall be maintained, identifying all assets with intellectual property protection requirements.
(client) shall retain verifiable documentation of ownership for licenses, manuals, and other relevant intellectual property materials.
Compliance with software license limitations, such as the number of permitted users or resources (e.g., CPUs), shall be strictly enforced.
Regular reviews shall be conducted to verify that only authorized software and licensed products are installed on organizational systems.
Procedures shall be established for maintaining proper license compliance for all software used by (client).
(client) shall develop procedures for the disposal or transfer of software to others in accordance with applicable licensing agreements.
When obtaining software and information from public networks or external sources, (client) shall ensure adherence to the associated terms and conditions.
(client) shall strictly prohibit unauthorized duplication, conversion, or extraction from commercial recordings (video, audio) beyond the exceptions permitted by copyright law or applicable licenses.
Unauthorized copying, in full or in part, of standards (e.g., ISO/IEC), books, articles, reports, or other documents is prohibited, except as permitted by copyright law or applicable licenses.
(client) shall acknowledge the existence of intellectual property rights, including software copyrights, design rights, trademarks, patents, and source code licenses. Software products are often supplied under license agreements that specify limitations on use, such as restricting installation to designated machines or permitting only backup copies.
Data acquired from external sources may be subject to specific terms outlined in data sharing agreements or similar legal instruments. These agreements should clearly define permitted processing activities for the acquired data.
(client) recognizes that legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual requirements can restrict the copying of proprietary materials. Generally, only materials developed by (client) or those licensed/provided by developers can be used.
(client) shall implement risk management strategies to address the potential for personnel and third parties to fail to uphold (client)'s intellectual property rights.
(client) shall implement safeguards to protect records from loss, destruction, falsification, unauthorized access, and unauthorized release.
(client) shall establish and maintain procedures to ensure the authenticity, reliability, integrity, and usability of records throughout their lifecycle, considering potential changes in business context and record management requirements.
(client) shall issue guidelines for record storage, handling, chain of custody, and disposal, incorporating measures to prevent record manipulation. These guidelines shall align with (client)'s records management policy and other relevant record requirements.
(client) shall develop a retention schedule that defines record types, their retention periods, and allowable storage media (physical or electronic).
(client) shall ensure the identification of records and their retention periods.
(client) shall ensure compliance with applicable national/regional legislation, regulations, and community/societal expectations (if relevant).
(client) shall ensure appropriate record destruction after the designated retention period has elapsed and the records are no longer required.
When determining record protection measures, (client) shall consider the corresponding information security classification assigned to each record type based on its classification scheme.
Records shall be categorized by type (e.g., accounting, transactions, personnel, legal) with details on retention periods and approved storage media.
Data storage systems shall be chosen to enable retrieval of records in an acceptable timeframe and format to meet specific requirements.
For electronic records, procedures shall be established to ensure long-term accessibility throughout the retention period, considering potential technology advancements and media degradation. This includes retaining any related cryptographic keys and programs necessary for decryption.
Storage and handling procedures shall adhere to manufacturers' recommendations for the chosen storage media, considering potential media deterioration over time.
(client) shall identify and comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and contractual requirements regarding privacy and protection of Personally Identifiable Information (PII).
(client) shall establish and communicate a comprehensive policy on privacy and protection of PII to all relevant stakeholders.
(client) shall develop and implement procedures for preserving privacy and protecting PII. These procedures shall be communicated to all personnel involved in processing PII.
To ensure compliance with relevant privacy and PII protection regulations, (client) shall establish appropriate roles, responsibilities, and controls. This may include appointing a dedicated privacy officer to provide guidance on individual responsibilities and established procedures.
Responsibilities for handling PII shall be defined in accordance with relevant legislation and regulations.
(client) shall implement appropriate technical and organizational measures to safeguard PII.
Due to varying data privacy laws in different countries, (client) shall consider the restrictions that apply to how PII is collected, handled, and transferred.
(client) shall conduct periodic independent reviews of its information security approach and implementation, encompassing people, processes, and technologies.
(client) shall conduct these reviews at planned intervals and in response to significant changes.
(client) shall define the scope of the reviews to include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for adjustments to the information security approach, encompassing the information security policy, topic-specific policies, and other controls.
(client) shall have independent reviews performed by qualified individuals with no involvement in the reviewed area (e.g., internal audit, independent manager, or external specialists).
(client) shall ensure individuals conducting the reviews possess the necessary competence for the task.
(client) shall ensure reviewers have no direct reporting line responsibility for the reviewed area to maintain independence in assessments.
(client) shall report the results of independent reviews to the initiating management level and, if applicable, to top management.
(client) shall maintain records of independent reviews.
(client) shall initiate corrective actions upon identification of inadequacies in the information security approach or implementation (e.g., unmet documented objectives, non-compliance with policy directives).
(client) shall conduct independent reviews in response to changes in applicable laws and regulations.
(client) shall conduct independent reviews following significant security incidents.
(client) shall conduct independent reviews when (client) undergoes new business ventures or modifies existing ones.
(client) shall conduct independent reviews when (client) adopts new products or services, or modifies the use of existing ones.
(client) shall conduct independent reviews when (client) implements significant changes to information security controls and procedures.
(client) shall conduct regular reviews of compliance with the information security policy, topic-specific policies, rules, and standards.
Managers, service/product/information owners shall be responsible for identifying methods to assess how well-established information security requirements are met (as outlined in the security policy, topic-specific policies, rules, standards, and other applicable regulations).
(client) shall consider utilizing automated measurement and reporting tools to streamline regular compliance reviews.
(client) shall require managers to determine the root cause of any non-compliance identified during a review.
(client) shall require managers to evaluate the need for corrective actions to achieve compliance following a non-compliance finding.
(client) shall require managers to implement appropriate corrective actions to address any identified non-compliance.
(client) shall require managers to review the effectiveness of corrective actions taken for non-compliance and identify any deficiencies or weaknesses.
Records of compliance reviews, corrective actions taken by managers/service/product/information owners, and the results shall be documented and maintained.
When an independent review coincides with a manager's area of responsibility, the manager shall report their compliance review results to the independent reviewers.
Corrective actions shall be completed in a timely manner based on the associated risk. If not completed by the next scheduled review, progress towards completion shall be addressed.
(client) shall document and provide readily accessible operating procedures for information processing facilities to personnel who require them.
(client) shall establish documented procedures for activities requiring consistent performance by multiple personnel.
(client) shall establish documented procedures for activities performed infrequently where knowledge retention is a concern.
(client) shall establish documented procedures for  new activities that carry a risk of errors if not performed correctly.
(client) shall establish documented procedures for activities being transitioned to new personnel.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify the individuals responsible for each activity.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Secure system installation and configuration procedures.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Secure processing and handling methods for both automated and manual information.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Backup and resilience strategies.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Scheduling requirements, including dependencies on other systems.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Error and exception handling instructions (e.g., restrictions on utility programs during job execution).
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Support and escalation contacts, including external resources for unexpected operational or technical difficulties.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Storage media handling instructions.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify System restart and recovery procedures for system failures.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Audit trail, system log, and video monitoring system management processes.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify Monitoring procedures for capacity, performance, and security.
(client)’s documented operating procedures shall specify System maintenance instructions.
(client) shall review and update documented operating procedures as needed.
(client) shall authorize all changes to documented operating procedures.
(client) shall strive for consistency in information system management by utilizing the same procedures, tools, and utilities whenever technically feasible.  
(client) shall conduct proportional, pre-employment and ongoing background verifications, complying with relevant laws, regulations, and ethics, based on business needs, information access levels, and perceived risks.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive screening process encompassing all personnel categories, including full-time, part-time, and temporary staff.
(client)'s contractual agreements with service suppliers shall mandate appropriate screening requirements for all personnel assigned to work on (client)'s behalf.
information on all candidates under consideration for positions within (client) shall be collected and processed in accordance with relevant legislation in the respective jurisdiction.
Organizations is legally required to inform candidates about screening activities depending on the jurisdiction.
All verification activities must comply with all applicable privacy laws, regulations, and employment-based legislation regarding the protection of personally identifiable information (PII).
(client) should incorporate verification of satisfactory references, including both business and personal references where relevant and compliant with local regulations, into their screening process.
(client) should conduct a verification of the applicant's curriculum vitae to ensure its completeness and accuracy, following all applicable legal and ethical guidelines.
(client) should verify the applicant's claimed academic and professional qualifications, adhering to all relevant legal and ethical considerations.
(client) should conduct independent verification of the applicant's identity using government-issued documents such as passports or other officially recognized identification, in accordance with local laws and regulations.
For critical roles, (client) shall conduct more in-depth verification measures, such as credit reviews or criminal record checks, while adhering to all relevant legal and ethical guidelines and obtaining the candidate's explicit consent where required by law.
When filling an information security role, (client) should thoroughly assess the candidate's competence to ensure they possess the necessary skills and knowledge to effectively fulfill the security responsibilities.
When filling a critical information security role, (client) should conduct a comprehensive assessment not only of the candidate's technical skills and knowledge but also of their trustworthiness and reliability.
For positions granting access to information processing facilities, especially those involving sensitive data like financial, personal, or healthcare information, (client) should consider implementing additional, more comprehensive verification measures beyond the standard screening procedures.
(client) should establish clear procedures outlining the criteria and limitations for conducting verification reviews.
(client) should have a mitigation plan in place for situations where verification activities cannot be completed within the desired timeframe. This plan should outline proportionate controls implemented until the review is finalized, ensuring both security and fairness to the candidate.
(client) shall implement periodic re-verification measures for personnel, particularly those holding critical roles, to confirm their continued suitability for the position. The frequency and scope of these re-verifications should be based on a risk-based assessment
(client) shall clearly outline the personnel's and (client)'s responsibilities for information security within the employment contractual agreements.
(client) shall ensure that the contractual obligations for personnel align with and reference (client)'s information security policy and relevant topic-specific policies.
(client) shall require  personnel granted access to confidential information and associated assets to sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA) outlining their confidentiality obligations before granting such access.
(client) shall clearly define within the contractual obligations personnel's legal responsibilities and rights regarding compliance with relevant laws and regulations, including but not limited to copyright laws and data protection legislation.
(client) shall specify within the contractual obligations personnel's responsibilities for classifying information, managing (client)'s information and associated assets, information processing facilities, and information services they handle.
(client) shall define within the contractual obligations personnel's responsibilities for handling information received from interested parties, ensuring compliance with relevant regulations and ethical considerations.
(client) shall outline within the contractual obligations the consequences of disregarding (client)'s security requirements, including potential disciplinary actions and legal ramifications.
(client) shall clearly communicate information security roles and responsibilities to candidates as part of the pre-employment process.
(client) shall obtain the personnel's agreement to the terms and conditions concerning information security, as outlined in the relevant policies and procedures.
(client) shall tailor the information security terms and conditions to the specific level and nature of access personnel will have to (client)'s information systems and associated assets.
(client) shall review and update the information security terms and conditions whenever there are changes to laws, regulations, the information security policy, or relevant topic-specific policies.
(client) shall, where deemed necessary and legally permissible, extend specific information security responsibilities outlined in the terms and conditions of employment for a defined period after the termination of employment. This extension should be clearly defined and communicated to personnel beforehand.
(client) shall, at its discretion and in accordance with legal and contractual considerations, require external parties engaging with (client) through supplier personnel to enter into contractual agreements outlining the information security responsibilities and obligations of the supplier personnel.
(client) shall establish an information security awareness, education, and training program aligned with (client)'s information security policy, relevant topic-specific policies, and information security procedures. This program should be tailored to the specific information assets being protected and the controls implemented to safeguard them.
(client) shall conduct information security awareness, education, and training activities on a periodic basis.
(client) shall provide initial information security awareness, education, and training to new personnel and those transferring to positions with significantly different information security responsibilities.
(client) shall implement methods to assess personnel's understanding of information security concepts following awareness, education, or training activities to evaluate knowledge transfer and program effectiveness.
(client) shall design its information security awareness program to inform personnel of their responsibilities for information security and equip them with the knowledge and skills to fulfill those responsibilities effectively.
(client) shall develop its information security awareness program considering the diverse roles of personnel, including internal staff, external consultants, and supplier personnel, tailoring the content and delivery methods to their specific information security needs and responsibilities.
(client) shall schedule information security awareness activities at regular intervals to ensure ongoing awareness, facilitate knowledge retention for existing personnel, and integrate new personnel into the information security culture.
(client) shall incorporate lessons learned from information security incidents into its information security awareness program to improve its effectiveness and address emerging threats and vulnerabilities.
(client) shall utilize a diverse range of awareness-raising activities through appropriate physical or virtual channels, including campaigns, booklets, posters, newsletters, websites, information sessions, briefings, e-learning modules, and emails, to effectively engage personnel in information security awareness.
(client) shall clearly communicate management's commitment to information security and its importance to the overall success of (client) within the information security awareness program.
(client) shall ensure information security awareness programs cover the need for personnel to be familiar with and comply with all applicable information security rules and obligations, including (client)'s information security policy, relevant topic-specific policies, standards, and any external factors like laws, regulations, contracts, and agreements.
(client) shall foster a sense of personal accountability within the information security awareness program, emphasizing individuals' responsibility for their actions and inactions regarding the security of (client)'s information and that of interested parties.
(client) shall incorporate basic information security procedures and baseline controls into the information security awareness program, equipping personnel with the fundamental knowledge and skills to protect (client)'s information.
(client) shall provide clear contact points and readily accessible resources, including additional information security awareness materials, within the program to empower personnel to seek further information and guidance on information security matters.
(client) shall develop and implement a tailored training plan for technical teams, equipping them with the specific skill sets and expertise required to effectively fulfill their roles.
(client) shall ensure technical teams possess the skills necessary to configure, maintain, and enforce the appropriate security level for devices, systems, applications, and services.
(client) shall design the information security education and training program to be flexible and adaptable, offering diverse delivery methods (e.g., classroom, distance learning, web-based, self-paced) and incorporating various learning approaches (e.g., lectures, self-studies, on-the-job training, staff rotation) to cater to different learning styles and cater to the specific needs of (client) and personnel.
(client) shall encourage technical personnel to engage in continuous professional development activities, such as subscribing to relevant publications, attending conferences and events, or pursuing additional training, to maintain their technical knowledge and expertise.
(client) shall establish and communicate a formal disciplinary process for addressing information security policy violations by personnel and other relevant interested parties.
(client) shall conduct a thorough investigation to verify an information security policy violation before initiating any disciplinary action.
(client) shall implement a graduated disciplinary response for information security policy violations, considering the severity of the offense, the individual's past record, and any mitigating factors.
(client) shall take into account the nature and severity of the information security policy violation, including the who, what, when, and how of the breach, as well as its consequences, when determining the appropriate disciplinary response.
(client) shall consider whether the information security policy violation was intentional (malicious) or unintentional (accidental) when determining the appropriate disciplinary response.
(client) shall consider the individual's history of information security policy violations, including whether it is a first offense or a repeated offense, when determining the appropriate disciplinary response.
(client) shall consider whether the violator received appropriate training relevant to the information security policy violation when determining the appropriate disciplinary response.
(client) shall ensure that the chosen disciplinary response for information security policy violations adheres to all relevant legal, statutory, regulatory, and contractual requirements, while also considering any other pertinent factors as necessary.
(client) shall leverage the disciplinary process not only to address information security policy violations but also to deter future transgressions by personnel and other relevant interested parties.
(client) shall take immediate action in response to deliberate information security policy violations,  considering the severity of the offense and potential harm caused.
(client) shall, in accordance with applicable legal and ethical requirements, strive to protect the identity of individuals subject to disciplinary action, while still effectively communicating the seriousness of information security policy violations and upholding a culture of accountability.
(client) shall implement an incentive program to recognize and reward individuals who demonstrate exceptional behavior in adhering to information security policies and procedures.
(client) shall clearly define, enforce, and communicate information security responsibilities and duties that remain valid after termination or change of employment to relevant personnel and other interested parties.
(client) shall establish a process for managing termination or change of employment, explicitly outlining which information security responsibilities and duties, such as confidentiality of information, intellectual property, and knowledge acquired, remain valid after the individual's departure. This includes adhering to any existing confidentiality agreements.
(client) shall ensure that information security responsibilities and duties that remain valid after termination of employment or contract are explicitly outlined and enforceable within the individual's terms and conditions of employment, contract, or agreement.
(client) shall, where applicable and legally permissible, consider extending information security responsibilities and duties beyond the termination of employment through other relevant contracts or agreements (e.g., non-disclosure agreements) that remain in effect for a defined period.
(client) shall treat changes of responsibility or employment as a combined termination of the existing role and initiation of the new role, ensuring that information security responsibilities and duties are appropriately transitioned and upheld throughout the process.
(client) shall identify and assign information security roles and responsibilities held by departing personnel to a designated individual upon termination or change of employment
(client) shall establish a process for communicating changes in information security responsibilities and operating procedures to relevant personnel, other interested parties, and appropriate contact points (e.g., customers, suppliers) following termination or change of employment.
(client) shall extend the process for managing information security responsibilities and duties after termination or change of employment to encompass external personnel (e.g., suppliers) when such events occur, including termination of personnel, contracts, job roles within (client), or changes in the supplier's assigned personnel.
(client) shall identify, document, and regularly review confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) that reflect its information protection needs, requiring all relevant personnel and other interested parties to sign such agreements before granting access to confidential information.
(client) shall ensure that confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) are legally enforceable and clearly define the obligations of personnel and other relevant parties to protect confidential information.
(client) shall apply confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) to both personnel and relevant interested parties.
(client) shall tailor the terms within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) to align with its specific information security requirements, considering the type of information being accessed (classification level, use), and the permissible access granted to the other party.
(client) shall include in confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) a clear definition of the information to be protected, explicitly identifying what constitutes "confidential information."
(client) shall define within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the expected duration of the obligation to protect confidential information, considering both finite timeframes and situations where indefinite confidentiality or protection until public knowledge may be necessary.
(client) shall outline within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the required actions upon termination, including the proper handling and potential return or destruction of confidential information.
(client) shall include within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the specific responsibilities and actions required of signatories to prevent unauthorized disclosure of confidential information.
(client) shall address within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the ownership of information, trade secrets, and intellectual property, clarifying how these concepts relate to the protection of confidential information and the respective obligations of the involved parties.
(client) shall define within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the permissible uses of confidential information, clearly outlining the signatory's rights and limitations regarding the use of such information.
(client) shall address within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the right to conduct audits and monitor activities involving highly sensitive confidential information,  specifying the circumstances under which such measures may be employed.
(client) shall incorporate within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) a clear process for notifying and reporting any unauthorized disclosure or suspected leakage of confidential information.
(client) shall include within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the terms for handling confidential information upon agreement termination, including the option for return or secure destruction at (client)'s discretion.
(client) shall define within confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) the consequences of non-compliance, including potential legal recourse and remedial actions available to (client) in the event of a breach of the agreement.
(client) shall ensure that confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) are drafted and implemented in compliance with the relevant laws and regulations of the jurisdiction in which they will be used.
(client) shall conduct periodic reviews of confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) and update them to reflect any changes in circumstances, information security requirements, or applicable laws and regulations.
(client) shall implement appropriate security measures to protect information accessed, processed, or stored outside (client)'s premises by personnel working remotely.
(client) shall establish a specific policy on remote working that outlines the conditions, expectations, and limitations associated with remote work arrangements.
(client) shall assess and address the physical security risks associated with remote working locations, considering the specific environment, local security conditions, and any relevant jurisdictional variations, to safeguard information accessed, processed, or stored remotely.
(client) shall establish rules and security measures for the remote physical environment,
(client) shall  implement appropriate communication security measures for remote access to organizational systems, considering the sensitivity of the information being accessed, transmitted, and the systems and applications involved.
(client) shall implement measures to mitigate the risks of unauthorized access to information or resources from individuals at the remote work location, considering the potential threats posed by family, friends, or other unauthorized individuals.
(client) shall establish guidelines for the secure use of home and public networks when accessing organizational resources, including requirements or limitations on the configuration of wireless network services, to mitigate information security risks.
(client) shall require the use of appropriate security measures on devices used for remote work, including firewalls, anti-virus, anti-malware, and software updates, to mitigate information security risks.
(client) shall implement secure controls for remote deployment and initialization of systems, ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information.
(client) shall implement strong authentication mechanisms for remote access to (client)'s network, considering the limitations of single-factor authentication and prioritizing multi-factor authentication (MFA) or other robust methods to verify user identity and access privileges.
(client) shall provide suitable and secure equipment and storage furniture for approved remote work activities. The use of privately-owned equipment not under (client)'s control is generally prohibited.
(client) shall establish clear guidelines outlining the permitted work activities, the classification of information accessible to remote workers, and the specific internal systems and services authorized for their use.
(client) shall implement training programs for personnel engaged in remote work and those providing support to remote workers. These training programs shall cover secure remote working practices, including information security policies, procedures, and best practices for protecting information and organizational assets.
(client) shall provide suitable communication equipment for approved remote work activities and establish requirements to ensure its secure use.
(client) shall emphasize the importance of maintaining physical security of information and equipment in remote working environments.
(client) shall establish a process for providing hardware and software support and maintenance for equipment used for approved remote work activities.
(client) shall require remote workers to back up their work data regularly and in accordance with organizational policies and procedures.
(client) shall implement appropriate audit and security monitoring procedures for remote work activities.
"Upon termination of remote working activities, (client) shall:
•	Revoke all access rights and privileges for organizational systems and resources.
•	Disable or deactivate all issued accounts and equipment.
•	Require the return of all organizational equipment and any company data stored on personal devices."
(client) shall establish and maintain accessible reporting channels for personnel to report suspected or observed information security events promptly.
(client) shall raise awareness among personnel and users of their responsibility to promptly report suspected information security events to minimize potential harm.
(client) shall clearly communicate the information security event reporting procedure and designated contact points to all personnel.
(client) shall implement a user-friendly, accessible, and readily available reporting mechanism for information security events, including incidents, breaches, and vulnerabilities.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of ineffective information security controls.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of a breach of information confidentiality, integrity, or availability.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of potential or actual human errors that have the potential to compromise information security.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of non-compliance with the information security policy, topic-specific policies, or applicable security standards.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of breaches of physical security measures that could compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of unauthorized or undocumented system changes, including those that have not gone through the change management process.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of malfunctions, anomalies, or unexpected behavior in software or hardware that could compromise information security.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of unauthorized or suspicious access attempts to information systems or resources.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification of potential or confirmed vulnerabilities in information systems, applications, or infrastructure.
(client) shall require information security event reporting upon the identification or suspicion of malware infection on any organizational system or device.
(client) shall prohibit personnel and users from attempting to independently verify or exploit suspected information security vulnerabilities.
(client) shall establish and maintain well-defined security perimeters to control physical access to areas containing information and associated assets.
(client) shall designate security perimeters around information assets, considering the sensitivity of the information and establishing the strength and location of each perimeter based on the corresponding information security requirements.
(client) shall maintain physically secure perimeters around buildings or sites containing information processing facilities, ensuring no gaps or easy access points for unauthorized entry.
(client) shall implement a program for alarming, monitoring, and testing of fire doors and surrounding walls within security perimeters, ensuring compliance with relevant standards for intrusion resistance.
(client) shall ensure that fire doors and associated security measures within security perimeters operate in a failsafe manner, prioritizing the prevention of unauthorized access in the event of a malfunction.
(client) shall maintain exterior roofs, walls, ceilings, and flooring of the site with solid construction that hinders unauthorized entry.
(client) shall ensure that all external doors are equipped with appropriate control mechanisms, such as bars, alarms, and locks, to deter and prevent unauthorized access.
(client) shall secure all doors and windows with appropriate locks when areas are unattended.
(client) shall  evaluate the need for and implement external protective measures for windows, particularly those at ground level, to deter unauthorized access.
(client) shall maintain adequate ventilation while ensuring the security of the premises. This may involve using secure ventilation systems or implementing alternative security measures when utilizing traditional ventilation points.
(client) shall establish scalable physical security measures for critical areas and assets, allowing for flexible enhancement during increased threat situations.
(client) shall implement appropriate entry control measures and secure access points to safeguard designated secure areas.
(client) shall control access points, including delivery and loading areas, and other potential entry points for unauthorized persons. These access points should be isolated from information processing facilities whenever possible to mitigate unauthorized access risks.
(client) shall restrict access to buildings and sites to authorized personnel only, implementing a process for managing physical access rights that includes granting, periodically reviewing, updating, and revoking authorizations.
(client) shall maintain a secure and monitored record of all physical access, either through a physical logbook or an electronic audit trail. This record shall be protected, and any sensitive authentication information within it shall be anonymized or encrypted.
(client) shall establish and implement a process and technical mechanisms for managing access to information processing and storage areas. This process shall incorporate multi-factor authentication, such as access cards, biometrics, or combinations thereof, to ensure authorized entry.
(client) shall utilize the implementation of double security doors for access control to highly sensitive areas, considering factors such as the sensitivity of the information and assets protected within.
(client) shall implement measures to control physical access to the site or building, such as establishing a staffed reception area or utilizing alternative access control mechanisms.
(client) shall implement a security screening process in accordance with local legislation and regulations. This process may involve measures such as visual inspections, walkthrough metal detectors, and bag scanning (if permitted), depending on (client)'s risk assessment and legal framework.
(client) shall require all personnel and interested parties to display a valid identification badge while on-site.
(client) shall require personnel to report the presence of unescorted visitors or individuals not wearing required identification to security personnel promptly
(client) shall implement a system of easily distinguishable badges for personnel categories such as permanent employees, suppliers, and visitors to enhance visual identification within (client).
(client) shall limit supplier personnel access to secure areas and information processing facilities to authorized individuals and only when strictly necessary for their work. This access shall be granted through a formal authorization process and subject to monitoring.
(client) shall implement enhanced physical access security measures for buildings holding assets for multiple organizations. These measures shall address the specific needs and requirements of each tenant while maintaining overall security effectiveness.
(client) shall design and implement physical security measures with built-in scalability to enable flexible enhancement during periods of increased threat level.
(client) shall secure emergency exits to prevent unauthorized access while ensuring they remain functional for their intended purpose in case of emergencies
(client) shall implement a key management process to ensure the controlled issuance, use, and secure storage of physical keys and other access credentials (e.g., lock codes, combination lock information) for offices, rooms, and facilities. This process shall include measures for key control, such as key cabinets, and access credential management practices.
(client) shall implement a key and access credential management process, including maintaining a record of key issuance and access and conducting regular audits to ensure controlled access to and secure storage of physical keys and other access credentials (e.g., lock codes, combination lock information).
(client) shall establish a process for verifying the identity of visitors using appropriate and reliable methods. These methods may include, but are not limited to, government-issued identification, pre-registration, or other means deemed suitable based on the visitor's purpose and the sensitivity of the area they wish to access.
(client) shall maintain a record of visitors, including their date and time of entry and departure. This record may be kept in a physical logbook or an electronic system.
(client) shall grant access to visitors only for pre-authorized and specific purposes. Prior to entry, visitors shall be informed of the security requirements applicable to the area they will be visiting and receive instructions on emergency procedures. These instructions may be provided verbally, in writing, or through a combination of methods.
(client) shall establish a process for managing visitor access and supervision. This process shall consider the sensitivity of the area, the visitor's purpose and activities, and the potential risks involved. Based on this assessment, visitors may be granted unsupervised access in specific low-risk situations with appropriate justification.
(client) shall restrict access to delivery and loading areas from outside the building to identified and authorized personnel only.
(client) shall design and maintain delivery and loading areas to physically separate them from other parts of the building, ensuring that deliveries can be loaded and unloaded without granting unauthorized access to delivery personnel.
(client) shall implement measures to ensure that external doors of delivery and loading areas are secured whenever doors leading to restricted areas are opened.
(client) shall establish a process for verifying the integrity and content of incoming deliveries prior to their movement from the delivery and loading areas. This process may involve visual inspection, verification of packing slips.
(client) shall implement a process for registering incoming deliveries upon their arrival at the designated receiving area. This registration process shall be conducted in accordance with established asset management procedures.
(client) shall physically separate incoming and outgoing shipments whenever possible. This may involve dedicated storage areas, designated loading zones, or implementing clear demarcations within shared storage spaces.
(client) shall establish a process for visually inspecting incoming deliveries upon arrival at the designated receiving area to identify potential signs of tampering during transit. This process should be conducted by trained personnel who understand the indicators of tampering. Any identified concerns or suspected tampering shall be promptly reported to security personnel for further investigation.
(client) shall design and implement a physical security program for offices, rooms, and facilities to safeguard personnel, assets, and information.
(client) shall locate critical facilities in areas with restricted public access.
(client) shall design and construct buildings housing critical facilities to minimize their external visibility and avoid obvious identification of information processing activities, both internally and externally.
(client) shall design and maintain facilities, including windows, doors, and walls, to prevent unauthorized individuals outside from seeing or hearing confidential information or activities taking place within.
(client) shall restrict the distribution of directories, internal telephone books, and online accessible maps that identify the locations of confidential information processing facilities to authorized personnel only.
(client) shall implement a continuous monitoring system for the premises to detect and deter unauthorized physical access.
(client) shall utilize a combination of security measures, including security guards, intrusion alarms, video surveillance systems (CCTV), and physical security information management (PSIM) software (either internally managed or outsourced), to monitor the physical premises and deter unauthorized access.
(client) shall install and maintain video surveillance systems (CCTV) to continuously monitor access to buildings housing critical systems, both internally and externally, for the purpose of detecting and responding to unauthorized access and suspicious behavior.
(client) shall install, maintain, and periodically test contact, sound, or motion detectors, in accordance with relevant standards, to trigger an intrusion alarm upon unauthorized access attempts or suspicious activity in buildings housing critical systems.
(client) shall configure intrusion alarm systems in buildings housing critical systems to cover all external doors and accessible windows, ensuring continuous monitoring and detection of unauthorized access or suspicious behavior.
(client) shall establish a comprehensive alarm system covering all unoccupied areas and providing additional security measures for sensitive areas like computer or communications rooms.
(client) shall treat the design of monitoring systems as sensitive information and implement appropriate security measures to protect it from unauthorized disclosure. This may include, but is not limited to, restricting access to information, utilizing encryption techniques, and conducting regular security awareness training for personnel.
(client) shall implement safeguards to protect physical security monitoring systems from unauthorized access
"(client) shall install and maintain intrusion alarm control panels in the following manner:
•	Located within a secured, alarmed zone: To deter unauthorized access and tampering.
•	For safety alarms, positioned near an easily accessible exit route: To ensure safe and timely evacuation for individuals activating the alarm.
•	Equipped with tamperproof mechanisms: To prevent unauthorized deactivation or manipulation of the control panel and detectors."
(client) shall establish and maintain a regular testing schedule for the physical security monitoring system, including components powered by batteries, to verify functionality and ensure continuous effectiveness.
(client) shall implement all monitoring and recording mechanisms in compliance with relevant local laws and regulations.
(client) shall design and implement a comprehensive program to protect its infrastructure from physical and environmental threats, encompassing natural disasters, intentional harm, and unintentional incidents.
(client) shall conduct regular risk assessments, including prior to critical operations at any physical site, to identify the potential consequences of physical and environmental threats.
(client) shall conduct risk assessments to identify relevant physical and environmental threats, and implement appropriate controls based on the assessed risks.
(client) shall implement and maintain appropriate safeguards based on ongoing monitoring of evolving physical and environmental threats to mitigate identified risks.
(client) shall seek expert advice in managing risks associated with physical and environmental threats, including fire, flood, earthquake, explosion, civil unrest, toxic waste, environmental emissions, natural disasters, and human-caused disasters.
(client) shall consider local topography, including elevation, proximity to bodies of water, and proximity to tectonic fault lines, when selecting and constructing physical premises to mitigate potential risks from environmental threats.
(client) shall consider urban threat landscapes, including areas with a high risk of political unrest, criminal activity, or terrorist attacks, when selecting locations for physical premises to enhance overall security posture.
"(client) shall implement a fire detection and suppression system, including:
•	Early-stage fire detection systems: To identify fire threats promptly.
•	Alarm notification systems: To alert personnel of fire emergencies.
•	Automatic fire suppression systems (where appropriate): To extinguish fires and minimize damage."
(client) shall select and implement fire suppression systems that utilize the most appropriate extinguishing agent based on the potential fire types, surrounding environment, and associated safety considerations.
"(client) shall implement a flood detection and mitigation system in areas housing storage media and information processing systems, including:
•	Early-stage flood detection systems: Installed under floors to identify potential water leaks or flooding promptly.
•	Readily available water removal equipment: Such as water pumps or other appropriate means, to mitigate the impact of flooding and minimize damage to critical assets."
(client) shall implement a surge protection strategy to safeguard information systems, including both servers and client devices, from damage caused by electrical surges or similar power disturbances.
(client) shall conduct random inspections for personnel, vehicles, and goods entering sensitive information processing facilities, in accordance with local legislation and regulations.
(client) shall design and implement security measures for all personnel working in designated secure areas.
(client) shall ensure that its security measures for designated secure areas apply to all personnel and encompass all activities conducted within those areas.
(client) shall implement a need-to-know principle for access to information and activities within designated secure areas. Personnel shall only be made aware of the existence of, or activities within, such areas to the minimum extent necessary for the performance of their assigned duties.
(client) shall prohibit unsupervised work in designated secure areas to mitigate both safety risks and the potential for unauthorized or malicious activities.
(client) shall physically secure vacant secure areas through locking mechanisms.
(client) shall conduct periodic inspections of these areas to verify their continued security and identify any potential issues.
(client) shall prohibit the use of unauthorized photographic, video, audio, or other recording equipment, including cameras in user endpoint devices, within secure areas.
(client) shall implement a policy for the controlled use of user endpoint devices (UEDs) in designated secure areas, balancing security needs with operational requirements.
(client) shall make emergency procedures readily accessible for all personnel authorized to access designated secure areas.
(client) shall define and enforce clear desk and clear screen policies covering paper documents, removable storage media, and electronic information displayed on screens in information processing facilities. This policy will be established and communicated to all personnel with access to sensitive information.
(client) shall secure sensitive or critical business information (on paper or electronic storage media) in a safe, cabinet, or other approved secure storage solution whenever not in use.
(client) shall pay particular attention to securing sensitive or critical business information when the office is vacated.
(client) shall implement appropriate security measures to protect user endpoint devices when not in use or unattended
(client) shall ensure user endpoint devices are logged off when unattended.
(client) shall implement a screen and keyboard locking mechanism controlled by a user authentication mechanism to secure unattended user endpoint devices.
(client) shall configure all computers and systems with an automatic inactivity timeout and logout feature to enhance security when left unattended.
(client) shall establish a policy requiring users to promptly collect outputs from printers and multi-function devices after printing.
(client) shall strive to implement secure printing functionalities, such as PIN release or user authentication, where feasible and appropriate, to enhance the security of printed outputs.
(client) shall store documents containing sensitive information in secure locations, such as locked cabinets, drawers, or designated secure areas.
(client) shall store removable storage media containing sensitive information in a secure manner
(client) shall implement a secure disposal process for documents containing sensitive information that are no longer required, ensuring they are shredded or otherwise rendered unreadable and disposed of through authorized waste disposal channels that adhere to environmental and security best practices.
(client) shall establish and communicate clear rules and guidance for managing pop-up notifications on user screens, these guidelines should encourage users to disable non-essential pop-ups, particularly during presentations, screen sharing, or while in public areas, to minimize potential distractions and maintain professionalism.
(client) shall implement a procedure for the clearing of sensitive or critical information displayed on whiteboards and other visual display surfaces
(client) shall establish and implement a procedure for vacating facilities, including a final sweep to ensure all organizational assets are removed and no sensitive information is left behind.
(client) shall site equipment in a manner that minimizes unnecessary access from work areas and deters unauthorized access.
(client) shall strategically locate information processing facilities handling sensitive data to minimize the risk of unauthorized viewing of information during operation.
(client) shall implement comprehensive controls to mitigate potential physical, environmental, and infrastructure threats, including but not limited to theft, fire, explosives, smoke, water damage, dust, vibration, chemical hazards, electrical interference, communication disruption, electromagnetic radiation, and vandalism.
(client) shall  establish and enforce clear guidelines regarding eating, drinking, and smoking in close proximity to information processing facilities to minimize the risk of damage to equipment, data, and overall operational integrity.
(client) shall implement environmental monitoring for critical parameters, such as temperature and humidity, within information processing facilities to ensure optimal operating conditions and mitigate potential equipment damage.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive lightning protection program for all buildings, adhering to relevant codes and standards.
(client) shall install lightning protection filters on all incoming power and communications lines entering its buildings, following industry best practices and applicable regulations.
(client) shall evaluate the need for and implement, where appropriate, specialized equipment protection measures, such as keyboard membranes, in industrial environments to mitigate potential damage caused by dust, debris, or other environmental factors.
(client) shall implement appropriate electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding measures to protect equipment processing confidential information, minimizing the risk of information leakage through unintended electromagnetic emanations.
(client) shall implement appropriate security controls to safeguard information processing facilities, regardless of their management, to prevent unauthorized access, data breaches, and other security risks.
(client) shall ensure that all devices storing or processing organizational information, regardless of ownership (organization-owned or BYOD), are authorized for use and implement appropriate security measures to protect them when used outside organizational premises.
(client) shall implement procedures to ensure that equipment and storage media containing organizational information are not left unattended in public or unsecured places when taken off-premises.
(client) shall instruct and require personnel using organizational equipment off-premises to adhere to manufacturer's recommendations for protecting the equipment from environmental hazards, including strong electromagnetic fields, water, heat, humidity, and dust.
(client) shall implement a system for tracking the chain of custody of equipment containing organizational information when transferred off-premises. This system shall, at a minimum, document the names and organizations of all individuals responsible for the equipment during the transfer process.
(client) shall ensure that any information not essential for off-premises equipment operation is securely deleted from the device before transfer.
(client) shall require authorization for the removal of equipment and storage media containing organizational information from the premises.
(client) shall maintain a record of all authorized removals, including details of the removed items and the personnel responsible, to facilitate audit trails.
(client) shall educate personnel on the risks of shoulder surfing and best practices to mitigate them when using devices containing organizational information in public places.
(client) may, based on a risk assessment, require the encryption of sensitive information stored on devices used by personnel when working outside (client)'s premises.
(client) shall implement a mobile device management (MDM) solution with features to locate, lock, and wipe organization-owned devices in case of loss, theft, or security breaches.
For BYOD devices used for organizational purposes, with explicit user consent and clear communication of limitations, (client) may utilize MDM solutions offering limited location tracking capabilities solely for security purposes, such as assisting in device recovery upon loss or theft.
(client) shall implement appropriate physical security measures, including monitoring, to safeguard equipment permanently installed outside (client)'s premises.
(client) shall implement comprehensive safeguards to protect permanently installed equipment outside (client)'s premises from physical and environmental threats.
(client) shall implement rigorous physical access controls and tamper-evident measures to safeguard equipment permanently installed outside its premises.
(client) shall implement robust logical access controls for equipment permanently installed outside its premises to restrict unauthorized access and safeguard sensitive data.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive storage media lifecycle management program that aligns with (client)'s classification scheme and handling requirements, encompassing acquisition, use, transportation, and secure disposal of all storage media.
(client) shall develop and implement a specific policy for the management of removable storage media, and ensure all personnel who use or handle such media are informed of the policy and its requirements.
(client) shall, based on a risk assessment, require authorization for the removal of removable storage media containing sensitive information from the premises.
(client) shall maintain a record of all authorized removals of removable storage media from the premises, including details of the removed media and the authorized personnel involved, to facilitate audit trails and support accountability.
(client) shall store all storage media, categorized by their information classification, in a secure and controlled environment that adheres to manufacturer specifications and protects against environmental threats like heat, moisture, humidity, electronic fields, and degradation due to age.
(client) shall, based on a risk assessment, require the implementation of cryptographic techniques to protect information stored on removable media, particularly when information confidentiality or integrity are critical considerations.
(client) shall implement a systematic data migration process to transfer information stored on removable media to fresh storage media before it degrades to the point of becoming unreadable, particularly when the information has ongoing business value.
(client) shall, based on a risk assessment, consider implementing a data redundancy strategy involving multiple copies of critical information stored on separate removable media to further mitigate the risk of accidental information loss or damage.
(client) shall implement a removable storage media registration system, considering factors such as the volume of removable media, the sensitivity of information stored, and the potential impact of information loss.
(client) shall disable removable storage media ports (e.g., SD card slots, USB ports) unless an authorized business need justifies their use.
(client) shall implement a system to monitor and log the use of removable storage media ports, including details like the type of media connected, the user involved, and the date/time of access.
(client) shall implement safeguards to protect information stored on removable media during physical transport, considering the sensitivity of the information and the chosen transport method (e.g., postal service, courier).
(client) shall establish and implement procedures for the secure reuse or disposal of storage media to minimize the risk of unauthorized access to confidential information.
(client) shall implement secure reuse or disposal procedures for storage media containing confidential information, with the level of security being commensurate with the information's sensitivity.
(client) shall securely delete data using approved sanitization software or format the storage media using a secure method before reusing any storage media that previously contained confidential information.
(client) shall securely dispose of storage media containing confidential information when no longer needed by employing methods such as physical destruction, shredding, or erasing data using approved sanitization software.
(client) shall establish procedures to identify storage media containing confidential information requiring secure disposal.
(client) shall exercise due diligence when selecting an external vendor for storage media disposal, ensuring they possess appropriate security controls, experience, and certifications for handling sensitive data.
(client) shall maintain a documented record of the disposal of storage media containing confidential information, including the type of media, disposal method used, and date of disposal.
(client) shall consider the "aggregation effect" when accumulating storage media for disposal, ensuring that the combined information on multiple devices, even if individually considered non-sensitive, does not become sensitive in its totality. This might involve implementing additional security measures during disposal for a large volume of media.
(client) shall conduct a risk assessment on damaged storage media containing confidential information to determine the appropriate disposal method (repair, secure deletion, or physical destruction) based on the potential for data recovery and associated security risks.
(client) shall consider implementing additional physical protection measures for storage media containing unencrypted confidential information.
(client) shall implement measures to protect information processing facilities from disruptions caused by power failures and other supporting utility outages.
(client) shall ensure that equipment supporting critical utilities is configured, operated, and maintained in accordance with the relevant manufacturer's specifications and industry best practices.
(client) shall conduct regular assessments of supporting utilities to evaluate their capacity to meet  current and anticipated business needs and assess their potential impact on, and interaction with, other supporting utilities.
(client) shall establish a program for the regular inspection and testing of equipment supporting critical utilities to verify their functionality and identify potential issues.
(client) shall implement a system for monitoring critical utilities and generating alerts to promptly identify potential malfunctions.
(client) shall, where appropriate based on a risk assessment, implement redundant utilities with physically diverse routing to minimize disruption from a single point of failure.
(client) shall isolate the network supporting critical utilities from the information processing network, if applicable and based on a risk assessment.
(client) shall restrict internet connectivity for equipment supporting critical utilities to authorized purposes only, employing robust security measures to mitigate associated risks when such connections are necessary.
(client) shall provide emergency lighting and communication systems to facilitate safe operation and response during disruptions to supporting utilities.
(client) shall install emergency shutoff switches and valves for critical utilities (e.g., power, water, gas) near emergency exits and equipment rooms for easy access during disruptions.
(client) shall maintain a readily accessible record of emergency contact information for key personnel and service providers responsible for critical utilities in the event of an outage.
(client) shall, where feasible and based on a risk assessment, procure redundant network connections from diverse providers to enhance resiliency against outages.
(client) shall implement measures to protect cables carrying power, data, or supporting information services from unauthorized interception, interference, or damage.
(client) shall prioritize placing power and telecommunications lines for information processing facilities underground.
For underground cables, (client) shall employ safeguards against accidental cuts, such as armored conduits or underground cable detection systems.
When underground placement is not feasible, (client) shall implement appropriate alternative protection measures such as floor cable protectors or utility poles.
(client) shall segregate power cables from communications cables to minimize electromagnetic interference.
(client) shall utilize armored conduit, locked rooms or boxes, and alarms at inspection and termination points for critical systems and systems containing sensitive information.
(client) shall consider employing electromagnetic shielding to safeguard cables carrying sensitive or critical information. This decision should be based on a risk assessment considering the specific threats and vulnerabilities of the system.
(client) shall conduct regular technical sweeps and physical inspections to detect unauthorized devices attached to cables carrying sensitive or critical information.
(client) shall implement controlled access to patch panels and cable rooms for critical systems and systems containing sensitive information, using methods such as mechanical keys, PINs, or other appropriate access control mechanisms.
(client) shall prioritize the use of fiber-optic cables for critical systems and systems containing sensitive information.
(client) shall label cables at both ends with clear and concise information, including source and destination details, to facilitate easy identification and inspection for physical security purposes.
Personnel responsible for cabling infrastructure shall possess the necessary knowledge and skills, or consult with qualified professionals, to effectively manage risks arising from cabling incidents or malfunctions.
(client) shall implement a program for the proper maintenance of equipment to ensure the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of information.
(client) shall maintain equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended service frequency and specifications to ensure optimal performance and security.
(client) shall establish and implement a comprehensive maintenance program for equipment, including regular monitoring and evaluation of its effectiveness.
(client) shall restrict repairs and maintenance of equipment to authorized personnel who possess the necessary skills and clearances.
(client) shall maintain detailed records of all suspected or actual equipment faults, as well as all preventive and corrective maintenance activities performed. These records shall include the date, type of issue, corrective actions taken, and any relevant details for future reference.
"(client) shall implement appropriate controls when equipment is scheduled for maintenance, considering whether the maintenance is performed:
•	Internally: by authorized personnel on-site, with controls in place to maintain data confidentiality and system availability.
•	Externally: by a third-party vendor, through a formal agreement outlining security expectations, access controls, and data protection measures."
(client) shall ensure that all authorized maintenance personnel, whether internal or external, are bound by confidentiality agreements or equivalent mechanisms to protect sensitive information.
(client) shall implement a supervision strategy for on-site equipment maintenance, considering factors such as task complexity, personnel expertise, and potential security risks. This strategy may involve direct supervision, remote monitoring, or alternative oversight measures as deemed appropriate.
(client) shall implement a process for authorizing and controlling access for remote maintenance, ensuring that only authorized personnel with appropriate credentials and access levels are granted temporary access to equipment for maintenance purposes.
(client) shall implement security measures to protect information when equipment containing sensitive information is taken off-premises for maintenance. These measures should address the entire lifecycle of the equipment outside (client)'s control.
(client) shall, as an obligation for maintaining insurance coverage, comply with all reasonable and documented equipment maintenance requirements stipulated by the insurance provider.
(client) shall establish and implement a process to inspect equipment after maintenance to verify proper functionality and identify any signs of tampering before returning it to operational status.
(client) shall implement measures for the secure disposal or reuse of equipment deemed no longer necessary, following established procedures for data sanitization, physical destruction (if applicable), and responsible e-waste management practices, in accordance with relevant regulations.
(client) shall verify that any storage media contained within equipment is free of sensitive data and licensed software through secure deletion or overwriting techniques, before disposal or equipment reuse.
(client) shall verify the presence or absence of storage media within equipment before proceeding with disposal or reuse.
"(client) shall ensure that storage media containing confidential or copyrighted information is either:
•	Physically destroyed using approved methods, or
•	Sanitized through secure deletion or overwriting techniques that render the original information unrecoverable, avoiding reliance on the standard delete function."
(client) shall remove all labels and markings that identify (client), classify the equipment, or indicate its owner, system, or network affiliation before disposal, including reselling or donating to charity. This aims to prevent unauthorized individuals from tracing the equipment back to (client) or gleaning sensitive information through the labels.
(client) shall be responsible for ensuring the proper deactivation and removal of security controls, such as access control systems and surveillance equipment, at the end of lease agreements or when relocating from premises.
(client) shall conduct a risk assessment for damaged equipment containing storage media to determine the appropriate disposal method (repair, secure deletion, or physical destruction) based on the potential for data recovery and associated security risks.
(client) shall verify that any storage media contained within equipment is free of sensitive data and licensed software through secure deletion or overwriting techniques.
(client) shall prioritize the use of full-disk encryption for equipment storing sensitive information, further reducing the risk of data disclosure during disposal or reuse.
(client) shall implement full-disk encryption using sufficiently strong cryptographic algorithms and long keys to protect sensitive information at rest. Encryption shall cover the entire storage device, including slack space and swap files. (client) shall also maintain robust key management practices to ensure the confidentiality of cryptographic keys, including separate storage from the encrypted data.
(client) shall establish a policy on secure user endpoint device configuration and handling.
(client) shall consider the types of information handled by the devices, including their classification level.
(client) shall address user endpoint device registration requirements.
(client) shall define physical protection requirements for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall establish restrictions on software installation, potentially allowing remote control by administrators.
(client) shall outline user endpoint device software and update requirements, potentially mandating automatic updates.
(client) shall establish connection rules for information services, public networks, and off-premises networks (e.g., requiring a personal firewall).
(client) shall define access controls for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall mandate storage device encryption for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall require malware protection for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall address remote disable/deletion/lockout capabilities for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall require backups of information stored on user endpoint devices.
(client) shall address web service/application usage on user endpoint devices.
(client) may consider incorporating user behavior analytics for user endpoint devices.
(client) shall address the use of removable devices (including disabling ports if possible).
(client) shall address partitioning for secure separation of organizational and personal data on user endpoint devices (if supported).
(client) shall consider additional technical safeguards for highly sensitive information stored on user endpoint devices, potentially including disabling offline file downloads and local storage (e.g., SD cards).
(client) shall strive to enforce user endpoint device security recommendations through configuration management or automated tools whenever possible.
(client) shall ensure all users are aware of security requirements and procedures for protecting user endpoint devices, including their responsibilities.
Users shall be advised to log off active sessions and terminate services when no longer needed on user endpoint devices.
Users shall be advised to secure user endpoint devices with physical controls (e.g., locks) and logical controls (e.g., passwords) when not in use, and avoid leaving unattended devices with sensitive information.
Users shall be advised to exercise caution with devices in public areas (e.g., avoid reading confidential information in view of others, utilize privacy screen filters).
Users shall be advised to implement physical safeguards against theft for user endpoint devices (e.g., in vehicles, hotel rooms, conference centers).
(client) shall establish a specific procedure for handling lost or stolen user endpoint devices, considering legal, regulatory, contractual, and security requirements.
for BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) scenarios (client) shall ensure Separation of personal and business use on user endpoint devices, potentially using software to support this separation and protect business data.
for BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) scenarios (client) shall ensure Granting access to business information only after users acknowledge responsibilities (physical security, software updates, etc.), waive ownership of business data, and accept the possibility of remote data wiping in case of loss, theft, or unauthorized access (considering PII protection legislation).
for BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) scenarios (client) shall ensure Establishing topic-specific policies and procedures to prevent disputes over intellectual property rights developed on personal devices.
for BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) scenarios (client) shall ensure Addressing potential limitations on access to private devices for security verification or investigations (as permitted by law).
for BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) scenarios (client) shall ensure Addressing potential licensing liabilities for software used on user-owned devices.
(client) shall establish procedures for configuring secure wireless connections on user endpoint devices (e.g., disabling vulnerable protocols).
(client) shall establish procedures for utilizing appropriate wired or wireless connections based on bandwidth needs outlined in relevant policies (e.g., for backups or software updates).
(client) shall implement a least privilege access control model for the allocation and use of privileged access rights.
(client) shall establish a formal authorization process for granting privileged access rights, aligned with the relevant access control policy.
(client) shall conduct risk-based assessments to identify users requiring privileged access for specific systems or processes.
(client) shall grant privileged access rights on a least privilege basis, considering the principle of job necessity and user competence to perform assigned tasks.
(client) shall maintain a documented authorization process for privileged access, including a record of approvals and justifications.
(client) shall define and implement policies for the periodic review and expiration of privileged access rights.
(client) shall employ mechanisms to ensure user awareness of their privileged access rights and their elevated access state (e.g., dedicated user IDs, designated interfaces, specialized equipment).
(client) shall implement multi-factor authentication or stronger authentication protocols for privileged access compared to standard user accounts. Re-authentication or step-up authentication may be required before privileged access use.
(client) shall conduct periodic reviews of users with privileged access to verify their continued eligibility based on current duties, roles, responsibilities, and demonstrably maintained competence, particularly following organizational changes.
(client) shall establish a policy to discourage the use of generic administrative accounts (e.g., "root"). If system configuration allows, (client) shall implement measures to manage and protect the credentials of such accounts.
(client) shall implement a least privilege approach for privileged access duration. Temporary privileged access shall be granted only for the time window necessary to perform approved changes or critical activities, and may be implemented as a "break-the-glass" procedure, potentially automated by privileged access management tools.
(client) shall implement comprehensive logging of all privileged access events to facilitate security audits and investigations.
(client) shall assign unique identities with specific privileged access rights to individual users. Shared or linked identities with privileged access shall be prohibited. Identity groups may be defined for simplified privilege management.
(client) shall restrict the use of identities with privileged access rights to authorized administrative tasks only. These accounts shall not be used for daily activities such as email or web browsing. Separate standard user accounts shall be used for such activities.
(client) shall implement access controls that restrict access to information and associated assets in accordance with established, topic-specific access control policies.
(client) shall deny access to sensitive information for unknown or anonymous user identities. Public or anonymous access shall be limited to designated storage locations containing only non-sensitive information.
(client) shall implement granular access control mechanisms within systems, applications, and services to regulate information access.
(client) shall define access controls that precisely delineate the data accessible by specific users based on their roles and responsibilities.
(client) shall establish RBAC to determine which identities or groups hold specific access permissions (read, write, delete, execute) for designated information assets.
(client) shall implement physical or logical access controls to isolate sensitive applications, application data, or systems, further restricting unauthorized access.
"(client) shall leverage dynamic access management techniques to safeguard sensitive, high-value information by:
•	Implementing granular access controls that consider user identity, access timeframes, and authorized methods.
•	Facilitating secure information sharing with external parties while maintaining control over access.
•	Enabling real-time dynamic management of information use and distribution.
•	Preventing unauthorized modifications, copying, and dissemination (including printing) of sensitive information.
•	Monitoring information usage patterns to identify potential risks.
•	Recording information changes for audit purposes and potential investigations."
(client) shall implement dynamic access management throughout the information lifecycle, encompassing creation, processing, storage, transmission, and disposal.
"(client) shall establish rules for dynamic access management, considering specific use cases such as: 
•	Granting access permissions based on user identity, device type, location, or application used to access information.
•	Utilizing the information classification scheme to determine which information necessitates dynamic access management safeguards.
•	Establishing operational procedures, monitoring and reporting processes, and supporting technical infrastructure for effective dynamic access management."
(client) shall utilize dynamic access management systems that require robust authentication for information access, using appropriate credentials or certificates.
(client) shall leverage dynamic access management systems to restrict access based on timeframes, such as expiration dates or designated access windows.
(client) shall utilize dynamic access management systems that employ encryption to protect information at rest and in transit.
(client) shall utilize dynamic access management systems to define and enforce printing permissions for sensitive information.
(client) shall utilize dynamic access management systems that log information access and usage activity for audit purposes. These systems shall also generate alerts for potential misuse attempts to facilitate timely response.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive access control framework to safeguard source code, development tools (compilers, builders, etc.), software libraries, and associated artifacts (designs, specifications, verification/validation plans).
(client) shall leverage a centralized source code management system to ensure secure storage and granular access control of source code.
(client) shall implement RBAC to differentiate read-only and write access privileges to source code based on the principle of least privilege and personnel roles. Broader read access may be granted internally, while write access shall be strictly limited to authorized personnel or designated code owners.
(client) shall establish controlled read access to a centralized repository for development teams working on shared code components, facilitating collaboration while maintaining security.
(client) shall establish a process for managing access to open-source or third-party code components, granting broad read access to external repositories while maintaining restricted write access to safeguard internal source code integrity.
(client) shall define and enforce formal procedures for managing access to program source code and libraries, aligning with established change control policies to ensure proper authorization and version control.
(client) shall grant read/write access to source code based on a risk-based assessment of business needs and established procedures. Source code updates and access grants shall require formal authorization by designated personnel.
(client) shall restrict direct developer access to the source code repository. Instead, developers shall utilize secure developer tools that manage authorized activities and access controls within the source code environment.
(client) shall maintain program listings in a secure environment with robust access controls for both read and write operations.
(client) shall maintain comprehensive audit logs of all source code access attempts and modifications for audit and forensic purposes.
(client) shall consider implementing additional controls, such as digital signatures, to ensure the integrity of source code intended for public release or distribution.
(client) shall implement robust authentication protocols aligned with information classification levels and the access control policy.
(client) shall employ appropriate authentication techniques to rigorously validate the claimed identities of users, software applications, transmitted messages, and other system entities.
(client) shall leverage strong authentication mechanisms (e.g., digital certificates, smart cards, tokens, biometrics) to safeguard access to highly classified information, supplementing or replacing password-based authentication where appropriate.
(client) shall mandate MFA for critical information systems, requiring additional authentication factors beyond usernames and passwords to bolster security.
(client) shall consider implementing risk-based, context-aware MFA. This may involve requiring additional authentication factors when users attempt to access information from unusual locations, unfamiliar devices, or outside designated timeframes.
(client) shall implement alternative authentication methods in conjunction with biometric authentication to mitigate the risks associated with potential compromise or limitations due to use conditions (e.g., moisture, aging).
"(client) shall design login procedures that prioritize the minimization of unauthorized access risks:
•	Restricting the display of sensitive system or application information until the successful completion of the login process.
•	Displaying prominent warnings that clearly communicate authorized user access requirements.
•	Eliminating login assistance messages that could be exploited by unauthorized users.
•	Deferring login credential validation until all required information has been entered."
(client) shall implement measures to safeguard against brute-force attacks, such as CAPTCHAs, password reset policies triggered after a predefined number of failed attempts, or user account lockout after exceeding a maximum number of login errors.
(client) shall maintain comprehensive logs of all login attempts (successful and unsuccessful) and shall trigger security events for suspicious login activity or breaches of login controls.
(client) shall provide users with post-login information (date/time of previous login, details of unsuccessful login attempts since the last successful login) displayed or sent on a secure channel.
(client) shall enforce password masking during login to prevent the display of passwords in clear text. Exceptions may be considered for accessibility purposes or to mitigate user errors.
(client) shall employ encryption protocols to safeguard password transmission over networks, preventing interception by malicious programs.
(client) shall enforce session timeouts for inactive user sessions, particularly on high-risk devices and in high-risk locations (e.g., public areas, external networks).
(client) shall implement connection duration limitations for high-risk applications to further reduce the window of opportunity for unauthorized access during active sessions.
(client) shall implement a continuous capacity assessment process to evaluate information processing facilities, human resources, and physical infrastructure. These assessments shall consider the business criticality of associated systems and processes to ensure sufficient capacity to meet current and projected demands.
(client) shall establish and enforce performance optimization practices, including system tuning and ongoing monitoring. These practices aim to maximize resource utilization and ensure the optimal availability and efficiency of systems.
(client) shall conduct rigorous stress testing of systems and services at regular intervals. This testing is designed to validate that sufficient capacity is available to handle peak performance requirements and identify potential bottlenecks.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive program of preventative and detective controls. This program aims to proactively identify potential resource limitations before they can negatively impact security or service availability, allowing for timely mitigation strategies.
(client) shall develop future-oriented capacity plans that consider anticipated business needs, system requirements, and projected trends in information processing capabilities. These plans will ensure proactive resource allocation and prevent capacity shortfalls.
(client) shall prioritize the careful management of resources with extended procurement lead times or high costs. This may involve implementing dedicated monitoring programs and contingency plans to address potential limitations.
(client) shall designate managers, service owners, and product owners to be responsible for monitoring the granular utilization of key system resources. This monitoring will inform capacity management decisions and resource optimization initiatives.
Managers shall leverage capacity data for proactive capacity management. This includes identifying and addressing potential resource limitations, mitigating security risks associated with dependence on key personnel, and developing data-driven action plans for resource optimization.
"(client) shall establish a response plan for addressing potential capacity limitations. This plan shall outline various scalable capacity expansion options, such as:
•	Strategic recruitment and hiring of additional personnel with specialized skillsets.
•	Acquisition of new or upgraded processing systems, memory, and storage to accommodate increased demand.
•	Strategic integration of cloud computing solutions to leverage on-demand scalability and cost benefits."
"(client) shall deploy comprehensive resource optimization strategies to maximize utilization efficiency. These strategies may include:
•	Archiving or deleting obsolete data to reclaim disk space.
•	Disposing of hardcopy records according to established retention policies to free up physical storage space.
•	Decommissioning inactive or outdated applications, systems, databases, and environments to streamline resource allocation.
•	Optimizing batch processes and scheduling to improve efficiency and resource utilization.
•	Optimizing application code and database queries to reduce resource consumption.
•	Denying or restricting bandwidth for non-critical, resource-intensive services (e.g., video streaming) to prioritize essential business functions."
(client) shall develop a documented capacity management plan for mission-critical systems. This plan would provide a detailed roadmap for ensuring the ongoing availability, performance, and scalability of these critical systems.
(client) shall implement a layered defense strategy against malware, combining endpoint anti-malware software with user awareness training and robust security controls.
(client) shall implement rules and controls to prevent unauthorized software execution. This may involve application allowlisting techniques to restrict users to approved applications.
(client) shall implement controls to prevent or detect access to known or suspected malicious websites, leveraging blocklisting strategies.
(client) shall prioritize vulnerability management to address security weaknesses that malware could exploit.
(client) shall conduct regular automated validation of software and data integrity, especially for critical systems. This includes investigating unauthorized file modifications and unapproved software installations.
(client) shall establish protective measures to manage the risks associated with obtaining files and software from external networks or removable media.
(client) shall deploy anti-malware software on all devices and update it regularly to ensure continuous protection against evolving threats.
"(client) shall conduct regular malware scans across various entry points, including:
•	Network traffic (various protocols like email, file transfer, web)
•	Email and instant messaging attachments
•	Downloaded files
•	Webpages accessed by users"
"(client) shall strategically deploy anti-malware tools based on risk assessments, considering:
•	Defense-in-depth principles for maximum effectiveness (e.g., network gateways, user endpoints, servers)
•	Evolving attacker techniques (e.g., encrypted malware delivery, secure protocols for malware transmission)"
(client) shall implement a process for the temporary or permanent disabling of anti-malware measures, requiring documented justification, exception approvals, and review dates to minimize disruption to operations.
"(client) shall develop comprehensive business continuity plans that address recovery from malware attacks. These plans should include:
•	Data and software backups (online and offline)
•	Disaster recovery procedures
•	Isolating critical systems from potential catastrophic consequences"
"(client) shall define clear procedures and designate responsibilities for handling malware incidents, including:
•	Training in malware identification, mitigation, and reporting
•	Incident response procedures for recovery from malware attacks"
(client) shall provide ongoing awareness training to all users on malware threats and mitigation strategies. This training will cover topics such as identifying and avoiding malware-infected emails, files, and programs.
(client) shall implement procedures for regular collection and analysis of information about new malware threats. This may involve subscribing to malware advisories from reputable sources or regularly reviewing relevant security websites.
(client) shall maintain an accurate asset inventory and leverage this data to continuously identify technical vulnerabilities within information systems.
(client) shall define clear roles and responsibilities associated with technical vulnerability management, encompassing vulnerability monitoring, risk assessment, patching, asset tracking, and any necessary coordination efforts.
(client) shall establish and maintain a list of reliable information resources to stay current on relevant technical vulnerabilities based on (client)'s asset inventory. This list will be updated to reflect changes in the inventory or when new resources are identified.
(client) shall include vulnerability reporting, handling, and disclosure requirements in all applicable contracts with information system suppliers, ensuring a coordinated vulnerability management approach.
(client) shall utilize vulnerability scanning tools appropriate for its technologies to identify vulnerabilities and verify the effectiveness of applied patches.
(client) shall conduct planned, documented, and repeatable penetration tests or vulnerability assessments by qualified personnel to support vulnerability identification. These activities will be conducted with caution to minimize the risk of compromising system security.
(client) shall integrate third-party library and source code vulnerability tracking into its secure coding practices to identify and address potential vulnerabilities.
(client) shall implement processes to proactively detect vulnerabilities within its products, services, and any external components used.
(client) shall establish a public point of contact for vulnerability disclosure, encouraging researchers and others to report vulnerabilities through online reporting forms or appropriate threat intelligence forums. (client) may also consider implementing bug bounty programs to incentivize vulnerability discovery and remediation. Additionally, (client) shall share relevant information with industry bodies or other interested parties.
(client) shall analyze and verify reported vulnerabilities to determine the appropriate response and remediation actions, which may include system updates or implementing other security controls.
(client) shall implement a software update management process to ensure the timely installation of the most up-to-date approved patches and application updates for all authorized software. Any necessary code modifications shall be applied to a designated copy, fully tested, and documented for future reference.
(client) shall conduct independent evaluations by a qualified body for critical software updates, especially those with the potential for unforeseen consequences.
(client) shall define clear timelines for responding to notifications of potential technical vulnerabilities, ensuring timely remediation efforts.
(client) shall leverage appropriate controls based on the urgency of identified vulnerabilities. These controls may include change management procedures or information security incident response protocols depending on the severity of the vulnerability.
(client) shall only utilize updates from legitimate sources (internal or external) to ensure authenticity and mitigate potential risks associated with unauthorized software updates.
(client) shall test and evaluate updates before deployment to minimize the risk of unforeseen side effects and ensure effectiveness in addressing the targeted vulnerability.
(client) shall prioritize remediation efforts for systems at high risk of exploitation due to identified vulnerabilities.
Upon identifying a vulnerability, (client) shall develop a remediation plan, typically involving software updates or patches. This will be followed by testing to confirm the effectiveness of the chosen mitigation strategy.
(client) shall implement mechanisms to verify the authenticity and effectiveness of applied remediations.
"For vulnerabilities lacking available updates or unpatchable software, (client) shall consider alternative controls such as:
•	Implementing vendor-recommended workarounds.
•	Disabling vulnerable services or functionalities.
•	Implementing or adjusting access controls (e.g., firewalls) at network borders.
•	Deploying traffic filters (virtual patching) to shield vulnerable systems from attack.
•	Increasing monitoring to detect active exploitation attempts.
•	Raising user awareness about the vulnerability."
(client) shall determine whether to utilize automatic update features for acquired software based on a risk assessment comparing the vulnerability risks with the potential risks associated with automatic updates.
(client) shall maintain comprehensive audit logs detailing all undertaken technical vulnerability management activities.
(client) shall regularly monitor and evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of its technical vulnerability
(client) shall establish, document, implement, monitor, and review configurations for hardware, software, services (including cloud services), and networks, encompassing security settings.
(client) shall define and enforce processes and tools to ensure adherence to established configurations (including security configurations) across hardware, software, services, and networks. This enforcement applies to both newly installed and operational systems throughout their lifecycle.
(client) shall define clear roles, responsibilities, and procedures for managing configuration changes effectively.
(client) shall establish standardized templates for the secure configuration of hardware, software, services, and networks.
(client) shall leverage publicly available secure configuration guidance (e.g., pre-defined templates from vendors and security organizations).
(client) shall tailor configurations to (client)'s specific security needs.
(client) shall ensure alignment with (client)'s security policies, standards, and other security requirements.
(client) shall consider feasibility and applicability within (client)'s context.
(client) shall periodically review and update configuration templates to address new threats, vulnerabilities, software/hardware versions, or evolving security requirements.
(client) shall grant the minimum level of access privileges (administrator/user) required for users to perform their assigned duties.
(client) shall disable unnecessary, unused, or insecure functionalities and services within systems.
(client) shall restrict access to powerful utility programs, host parameter settings, and administrative functions.
(client) shall ensure synchronized clocks across all systems.
(client) shall immediately change vendor-default authentication information (e.g., passwords) after installation and review other critical default security parameters.
(client) shall implement session timeouts that automatically log off inactive devices after a predetermined period.
(client) shall verify that all software licenses are up-to-date and meet compliance requirements.
(client) shall enforce the change management process for all configuration changes (see Change Management Policy).
(client) shall maintain comprehensive and up-to-date configuration records that include owner/point of contact information for each asset
(client) shall maintain comprehensive and up-to-date configuration records that include date of last configuration change
(client) shall maintain comprehensive and up-to-date configuration records that include configuration template version
(client) shall maintain comprehensive and up-to-date configuration records that include relationships to configurations of other assets
(client) shall securely store configuration records, utilizing methods like configuration databases or secure templates.
(client) shall employ a comprehensive set of system management tools (e.g., maintenance utilities, remote support tools, enterprise management systems, backup/restore software) to continuously monitor configurations.
(client) shall conduct regular configuration reviews to verify settings, evaluate password strengths, and assess system activity.
(client) shall compare actual configurations to defined target templates. Deviations will be addressed through automated enforcement of target configurations or manual analysis and corrective actions.
System documentation shall include details about hardware and software configurations.
(client) shall integrate system hardening practices into the configuration management process.
(client) shall strive to integrate configuration management with asset management processes and associated tools.
(client) shall leverage automation (e.g., infrastructure as code) to enhance security configuration management effectiveness.
(client) shall protect configuration templates and targets as confidential information, restricting unauthorized access.
(client) shall delete information stored in information systems, devices, or any other media when it is no longer required for business purposes.
(client) shall minimize the retention period for sensitive information to reduce the risk of unauthorized disclosure.
(client) shall select information deletion methods (e.g., electronic overwriting or cryptographic erasure) based on business needs, relevant laws, and regulations.
(client) shall document deletion activities to maintain an audit trail.
When using third-party deletion services, (client) shall obtain documented evidence of secure information deletion.
For information stored by third parties, (client) shall include information deletion requirements in agreements to ensure secure disposal during and upon termination of services.
(client) shall delete sensitive information following (client)'s data retention policy, relevant legislation, and regulations.
(client) shall configure systems to automatically destroy information when it reaches its retention period or when subject to a data subject access request.
(client) shall delete obsolete versions, copies, and temporary files wherever they reside.
(client) shall utilize approved, secure deletion software to permanently overwrite information, making recovery through specialized tools impractical.
(client) shall utilize approved and certified providers for secure disposal of storage media.
(client) shall employ disposal mechanisms appropriate for the type of storage media (e.g., degaussing for hard drives).
When using cloud services, (client) shall verify and utilize the cloud service provider's deletion method if deemed acceptable. Alternatively, (client) shall request the cloud service provider to delete the information. These deletion processes should be automated, if applicable, based on (client)'s data retention policies.
(client) shall implement logging mechanisms to track or verify deletion processes depending on the sensitivity of information.
To prevent unintentional exposure of sensitive information when returning equipment to vendors, (client) shall remove auxiliary storage devices (e.g., hard drives) and memory before equipment leaves the premises.
For devices where secure deletion is only achievable through destruction or built-in functionalities (e.g., factory reset), (client) shall choose the appropriate method based on the information classification handled by the device.
(client) shall maintain official records of information deletion activities to assist with potential incident analysis efforts.
(client) shall implement data masking in accordance with access control policies, other relevant policies, business requirements, and applicable laws.
(client) shall consider data masking, pseudonymization, or anonymization to protect sensitive data (e.g., PII).
(client) shall utilize pseudonymization or anonymization techniques to obscure PII identities, disconnect PII from individuals, or achieve information anonymity. Effectiveness of these techniques will be verified.
(client) shall ensure data anonymization encompasses all elements of sensitive information to prevent indirect identification.
(client) shall utilize encryption to mask sensitive data, requiring authorized users to possess decryption keys for access.
(client) shall utilize nulling or deleting characters to restrict unauthorized access to complete messages containing sensitive data.
(client) shall employ techniques to vary numbers and dates within data sets to obscure sensitive details.
(client) shall utilize substitution techniques to replace sensitive data with alternative values.
(client) shall leverage hash replacement to mask sensitive data by replacing values with their corresponding hash equivalents.
(client) shall implement access controls and masked data views to grant users access only to the minimum data required for their roles.
(client) shall implement obfuscation mechanisms to restrict user access to specific data elements within a record.
(client) shall implement mechanisms for "obfuscation of obfuscation" to prevent users from determining whether data has been obfuscated.
(client) shall comply with all legal and regulatory requirements concerning data masking (e.g., masking payment card information).
(client) shall determine an appropriate level of data masking, pseudonymization, or anonymization based on the intended use of the processed data.
(client) shall implement access controls to govern access to masked data.
(client) shall establish agreements or restrictions on the use of processed data.
(client) shall implement safeguards to prevent the combination of masked data with other information for PII identification.
(client) shall maintain records of masked data transfers (providing and receiving parties).
(client) shall implement data leakage prevention (DLP) measures to safeguard sensitive information across systems, networks, and devices used for processing, storage, or transmission.
(client) shall identify and classify information to prioritize DLP efforts based on sensitivity (e.g., personal information, pricing models, product designs).
(client) shall monitor potential data leakage channels (e.g., email, file transfers, mobile devices, portable storage).
(client) shall implement DLP controls to prevent information leakage (e.g., quarantining emails containing sensitive information).
(client) shall identify and monitor unstructured data (e.g., user systems) to detect sensitive information at risk of unauthorized disclosure.
(client) shall implement DLP mechanisms to detect the unauthorized disclosure of sensitive information (e.g., uploads to untrusted cloud services or email leaks).
(client) shall use DLP to block user actions or network transmissions that expose sensitive information (e.g., preventing database entry copying to spreadsheets).
(client) shall assess the need to restrict data copying, pasting, or uploading to unauthorized services, devices, or storage media. DLP tools or existing tool configurations may be used to allow remote data viewing and manipulation while preventing unauthorized copying.
(client) shall require data owner approval for data exports and hold users accountable for their actions.
(client) shall address screenshot and photography capture of sensitive information through terms of use, training, and auditing practices.
(client) shall ensure backups of sensitive information are protected with encryption, access controls, and physical security for storage media.
(client) shall consider DLP measures to protect confidential information (geopolitical, human resources, financial, commercial, scientific) from espionage or compromise.
(client) shall implement DLP strategies employing disinformation or misdirection to confuse adversaries (e.g., replacing real information with false information).
Legal counsel should be consulted to ensure compliance with privacy, data protection, and other relevant regulations.
(client) shall comply with various legal and regulatory requirements regarding data monitoring and processing within the context of DLP.
(client) shall maintain and regularly test backup copies of information, software, and systems according to the approved data backup policy.
(client) shall establish a data backup policy addressing data retention and information security needs.
(client) shall provide sufficient backup facilities to recover critical information and software after incidents, failures, or storage media loss.
(client) shall develop and implement plans for backing up information, software, and systems in accordance with the data backup policy.
(client) shall maintain accurate and complete records of backup copies and documented restoration procedures.
(client) shall perform backups based on business needs, information security requirements, and criticality (e.g., full or differential backups) as outlined in the data backup policy.
(client) shall store backups in a secure and remote location, sufficiently distant to avoid damage from a disaster at the primary site.
(client) shall provide backup media with a level of physical and environmental protection consistent with the main site's standards.
(client) shall regularly test backup media to ensure reliability for emergency restoration.
(client) shall conduct test restores of backed-up data onto separate systems to avoid overwriting original storage and potential data loss.
(client) shall implement encryption for backups based on identified risks (e.g., when confidentiality is crucial).
(client) shall take steps to detect inadvertent data loss before backups are performed.
(client) shall implement operational procedures to monitor backup execution and address failures to ensure complete backups according to the data backup policy.
(client) shall regularly test individual system and service backup measures to ensure alignment with incident response and business continuity plans.
Backup testing should be combined with restoration procedure testing to verify adherence to business continuity plan restoration time requirements.
Backup measures for critical systems and services shall encompass all system information, applications, and data necessary for complete disaster recovery.
(client) shall create backup copies of information, applications, and systems stored in cloud service environments.
(client) shall determine how well a cloud service's built-in backup features meet their backup requirements.
(client) shall establish a retention period for essential business information, considering any archive copy retention requirements.
(client) shall consider deleting information from backup media after exceeding its retention period, in accordance with relevant laws and regulations.
(client) shall conduct a comprehensive assessment to identify critical business service and information system availability requirements.
Based on the availability assessment, (client) shall design and implement a system architecture incorporating appropriate redundancy strategies to achieve the required uptime.
(client) shall implement various redundancy strategies to enhance system resilience, such as the duplication of critical information processing facilities, either partially (e.g., spare components) or entirely (e.g., mirrored systems) in geographically dispersed locations.
(client) shall establish documented procedures for activating redundant components and processing facilities.
Procedures will clearly define whether redundant components and processing activities are operating alongside primary systems for immediate failover.
Procedures will clearly define whether redundant components and processing activities are activated automatically or manually during emergencies.
(client) shall ensure that all redundant components and information processing facilities maintain an equivalent level of security as the primary systems.
(client) shall implement mechanisms to continuously monitor information processing facilities for potential failures.
(client) shall implement mechanisms to trigger pre-defined procedures to maintain service availability during repairs or replacements.
"(client) shall consider various redundancy options to further enhance system resilience, including:
•	Contracting with multiple reputable vendors for critical services, such as network connectivity and information processing facilities.
•	Utilizing redundant network connections to ensure continued communication in case of primary network outages.
•	Employing geographically separate data centers with mirrored systems for disaster recovery purposes.
•	Implementing redundant power supplies or sources to prevent service disruptions due to power outages.
•	Utilizing multiple parallel instances of software components with automatic load balancing to distribute processing demands and enhance scalability.
•	Duplicating critical system components (e.g., CPU, hard disks, memory) or network devices (e.g., firewalls, routers, switches) to provide immediate failover capabilities."
(client) shall, whenever feasible and ideally within a production environment, conduct rigorous testing of redundant information systems to validate the functionality of failover mechanisms.
(client) acknowledges that redundancy implementation shall introduce potential risks to information integrity (e.g., data copying errors) or confidentiality (e.g., inadequate security controls on duplicate systems). These risks will be thoroughly evaluated and mitigated during the design and implementation of information systems.
(client) acknowledges that redundancy in information processing facilities primarily addresses infrastructure-related downtime. Application-level unavailability due to internal application faults requires separate mitigation strategies.
When leveraging public cloud computing services, (client) shall benefit from features such as geographically dispersed, live versions of information processing facilities with automatic failover and load balancing capabilities.
(client) shall define a logging policy establishing the purpose of logs, data collected, and log-specific protection and handling requirements.
"(client) shall ensure event logs capture detailed information such as:
•	User IDs
•	System Activities
•	Dates, Times, and Event Details (e.g., logon/logoff)
•	Device Identity, System Identifier, and Location
•	Network Addresses and Protocols"
"(client) shall capture logs encompassing:
•	Successful/Rejected System Access Attempts
•	Successful/Rejected Data Access Attempts
•	System Configuration Changes
•	Privilege Use
•	Utility Program/Application Usage
•	File Access and Modifications (including deletions)
•	Access Control System Alarms
•	Security System Activation/Deactivation
•	Identity Creation/Modification/Deletion
•	User Transactions within Applications"
(client) shall implement synchronized time sources across systems for accurate log correlation during analysis and incident investigations.
"(client) shall implement controls to safeguard logs against:
•	Unauthorized Deletion/Deactivation (especially by privileged users)
•	Unauthorized Alterations (message types, editing, deletion)
•	Event Overwriting due to storage limitations"
(client) shall implement techniques like cryptographic hashing, append-only/read-only file recording, and public transparency logging for enhanced protection.
(client) shall establish a process for archiving audit logs based on data retention requirements and forensic evidence collection needs.
(client) shall de-identify logs sent to vendors for troubleshooting purposes (usernames, IP addresses, hostnames, etc.) using data masking techniques.
(client) shall implement appropriate privacy measures to protect sensitive data and personally identifiable information (PII) within logs.
(client) shall conduct log analysis to identify unusual activity or anomalous behavior that might indicate a compromise.
(client) shall ensure personnel possess the necessary skills to perform effective log analysis.
"(client) shall establish procedures for log analysis, including:
•	Defining required attributes of security-related events
•	Identifying exceptions using predetermined rules (SIEM, IDS signatures)
•	Comparing user/entity behavior against known patterns and standard traffic (UEBA)
•	Utilizing trend/pattern analysis tools and threat intelligence"
"Log analysis shall be supported by specific monitoring activities to identify and analyze anomalous behavior, including:
•	Reviewing access attempts (successful/unsuccessful) to protected resources
•	Checking DNS logs for malicious server connections
•	Examining service provider usage reports for abnormal activity patterns
•	Integrating physical monitoring event logs (e.g., entry/exit) for improved detection"
(client) shall implement log correlation techniques to enable efficient and accurate analysis.
Suspected and actual information security incidents identified through log analysis (e.g., malware infections) shall be investigated further.
(client) shall implement file interrogation tools to identify significant events for information security monitoring purposes amidst large log volumes.
(client) shall utilize a SIEM tool or equivalent service for log storage, correlation, normalization, analysis, and alert generation. Careful configuration is crucial to optimize SIEM benefits (log source selection, rule tuning, use case development).
(client) shall consider public transparency files (e.g., certificate transparency systems) as an additional detection mechanism for log tampering prevention.
In cloud environments, logging management responsibilities may be shared between the cloud customer and the cloud service provider. The specific allocation of responsibilities should be clearly defined in the cloud service agreement.
(client) shall monitor networks, systems, and applications for anomalous behavior, taking appropriate actions to investigate potential security incidents.
(client) shall define the scope and level of monitoring activities based on business needs, information security requirements, and relevant regulations. Monitoring records will be maintained for established retention periods.
(client) shall monitor network traffic (inbound and outbound)
(client) shall monitor system access activity
(client) shall monitor critical system and network configuration files
(client) shall monitor security tool logs (antivirus, ids, ips, web filters, firewalls, dlp)
(client) shall monitor system and network event logs
(client) shall monitor system file integrity (unauthorized code execution)
(client) shall monitor resource utilization and performance (cpu, memory, disk, bandwidth)
(client) shall establish a baseline for normal system and network activity to effectively identify anomalies.
(client) shall configure monitoring systems to identify anomalies by comparing activity against established baselines.
(client) shall establish baselines based on system utilization patterns (peak and normal periods)
(client) shall establish baselines based on user access patterns (time, location, frequency)
"(client) shall configure the monitoring system to trigger alerts for suspicious activity, such as:
•	Unplanned termination of processes/applications
•	Malicious traffic patterns (known malicious ip addresses/domains)
•	Recognized attack signatures (dos, buffer overflows)
•	Unusual system behavior (keylogging, process injection, protocol deviations)
•	Bottlenecks and overloads (network queuing, latency, jitter)
•	Unauthorized access attempts
•	Unauthorized system/application scans
•	Unusual user/system behavior deviations"
(client) shall implement continuous monitoring tools that are able to handle large data volumes
(client) shall implement continuous monitoring tools that are able to adapt to evolving threats
(client) shall implement continuous monitoring tools that are able to provide real-time notification
(client) shall implement continuous monitoring tools that are able to recognize specific threat signatures and behavior patterns
(client) shall utilize automated monitoring software configured to generate alerts (e.g., console, email, instant messaging) based on predefined thresholds. The alerting system will be continuously tuned and trained to minimize false positives.
(client) shall establish dedicated teams trained to effectively respond to security alerts and investigate potential incidents.
(client) shall implement redundant systems and processes to ensure consistent receipt and response to alert notifications.
(client) shall communicate information regarding abnormal events to relevant personnel for improved auditing, security evaluations, vulnerability scanning, and overall monitoring effectiveness.
(client) shall establish procedures to promptly respond to verified security incidents, minimizing potential damage.
(client) shall implement processes to identify and address false positives, including adjustments to monitoring software to reduce future occurrences.
(client) shall synchronize the clocks of information processing systems to approved time sources.
(client) shall document and implement external and internal requirements for time representation, reliable synchronization, and accuracy (legal, statutory, regulatory, contractual, standards, internal monitoring).
(client) shall define a standard reference time for internal use across all systems, including building management, entry/exit systems, and others relevant to investigations.
(client) shall utilize a reference clock linked to a radio time broadcast from a national atomic clock or GPS for logging systems, ensuring consistent and trusted timestamps.
(client) shall implement protocols like Network Time Protocol (NTP) or Precision Time Protocol (PTP) to maintain synchronization of networked systems with the reference clock.
(client) shall use two external time sources simultaneously to enhance the reliability of external clocks and effectively manage any discrepancies.
In environments with multiple cloud services or a combination of cloud and on-premises services, (client) shall monitor the clock of each service and record any time discrepancies to mitigate risks arising from these variations.
To safeguard system and application controls, (client) shall restrict and tightly control the use of utility programs possessing the capability to override them.
(client) shall adhere to the principle of least privilege by granting access to utility programs only to a minimal number of authorized and thoroughly vetted personnel.
(client) shall implement robust identification, authentication, and authorization procedures for utility programs, mandating unique user identification for each program user.
(client) shall establish and document distinct authorization levels to define permissible utility program access for different user groups.
(client) shall implement a formalized process for authorization of ad-hoc utility program use, ensuring appropriate oversight and approval.
To uphold segregation of duties principles, personnel granted access to applications on systems requiring such separation shall be prohibited from utilizing utility programs on those systems.
(client) shall remove or disable all utility programs deemed unnecessary, minimizing the attack surface and potential misuse.
(client) shall, as a minimum, implement logical segregation of utility programs from application software, creating an additional layer of security.
(client) shall segregate network traffic generated by utility programs from application traffic, facilitating anomaly detection and potential security incidents.
(client) shall restrict the availability of utility programs by implementing controls that limit access to the duration of an authorized change, minimizing the window of vulnerability.
(client) shall maintain comprehensive logs detailing all activity involving the use of utility programs, enabling audit trails and facilitating investigations.
(client) shall establish and implement documented procedures and measures to govern the secure installation of software on operational systems.
Updates for operational software shall be performed solely by designated and trained administrators following a formal management authorization process.
Only approved and validated executable code shall be deployed to operational systems. Development code and compilers are strictly prohibited on these systems.
All software installations and updates shall undergo rigorous testing and validation within a controlled environment before deployment to operational systems.
Corresponding program source libraries shall be updated in a synchronized manner with all software updates to ensure compatibility and functionality.
(client) shall employ a robust configuration management system to maintain comprehensive control and visibility over all operational software and associated system documentation.
A documented rollback strategy shall be established and reviewed before implementing any software changes on operational systems, ensuring a controlled and reversible process.
(client) shall maintain detailed audit logs that capture and record all updates made to operational software, facilitating accountability and forensic analysis.
Old software versions, along with all associated information including parameters, procedures, configuration details, and supporting software, shall be archived for contingency planning measures and as long as required to process archived data securely.
Decisions regarding upgrades to new software releases shall be based on a comprehensive assessment that considers both business requirements for the change and the potential security implications, such as the introduction of new security features or the known vulnerabilities of the current version.
Software patches addressing information security vulnerabilities shall be applied promptly upon release to mitigate potential risks.
(client) shall actively monitor and control dependencies on externally supplied software and packages to prevent unauthorized changes and mitigate the introduction of potential vulnerabilities.
Operational systems shall utilize software that is actively supported and maintained by the vendor to ensure access to critical updates and security patches.
(client) shall acknowledge and address the security risks associated with relying on software that is no longer supported by its vendor. A clear strategy for mitigating these risks shall be documented.
Open-source software used in operational systems shall be maintained at the latest appropriate release version to benefit from security fixes and improved functionalities.
(client) shall identify and address the security risks associated with relying on unmaintained open-source software within operational systems.
When involving suppliers in software installation or updates, physical or logical access shall be granted only when absolutely necessary and with documented, least-privilege authorization.
(client) shall implement procedures to monitor supplier activities during software installation and update processes to ensure adherence to security protocols.
(client) shall define and enforce clear policies regarding the types of software users are permitted to install on operational systems.
The principle of least privilege shall be applied when assigning software installation rights on operational systems. Users shall be granted only the minimum level of access required to perform their designated duties.
A clear distinction shall be established between permitted software installations (e.g., security patches and updates) and prohibited ones (e.g., personal-use software, software of unknown or questionable origin).
Software installation privileges shall be granted based on a user's designated role and responsibilities within (client), ensuring a risk-based and controlled approach.
The organization shall establish and enforce comprehensive security controls for its networks and network devices to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information within connected systems and applications.
Network security controls shall be implemented based on a thorough risk assessment, ensuring the protection of information traversing networks and connected services from unauthorized access, disclosure, modification, or destruction.
Networks shall be classified based on the type and sensitivity level of information they support. This classification will guide the selection and implementation of appropriate security controls.
Clear roles and responsibilities shall be defined and documented for network management activities, ensuring efficient operation and adherence to security protocols.
The organization shall maintain accurate and up-to-date network documentation, including network diagrams and configuration files for all network devices. This documentation shall be readily available for network management personnel and for incident response purposes.
Where appropriate, the organization shall establish a clear separation of operational responsibilities for network management from the management of ICT systems, promoting focused expertise and enhanced security.
The organization shall implement robust controls to safeguard the confidentiality and integrity of data traversing public networks, third-party networks, or wireless networks. These controls shall also protect connected systems and applications from unauthorized access and malicious activity.
The organization shall implement additional security controls to maintain the availability of network services and devices connected to the network. These controls may include redundancy measures, disaster recovery planning, and capacity management practices.
The organization shall implement comprehensive logging and monitoring practices across its network infrastructure. These practices shall capture and record events that can potentially affect information security, enabling timely detection, investigation, and response efforts.
The organization shall maintain close coordination between network management activities. This coordination will ensure service optimization and consistent application of security controls across the entire information processing infrastructure.
The organization shall implement robust mechanisms to authenticate systems and devices seeking access to the network, ensuring only authorized entities are granted access.
The organization shall implement access control lists and filtering mechanisms (e.g., firewalls) to restrict and manage system connections to the network. This approach will ensure only authorized traffic can traverse the network.
The organization shall establish robust controls to detect, restrict, and authenticate the connection of equipment and devices to the network, preventing unauthorized or malicious devices from gaining access.
The organization shall enforce device hardening practices on all network devices to minimize the attack surface and reduce potential vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors.
The organization shall segregate network administration channels from other network traffic. This segregation will minimize the impact of potential compromises on administrative systems and help protect critical network resources.
The organization shall implement temporary isolation of critical subnetworks (e.g., using drawbridges) during a security incident to contain the potential impact and facilitate faster recovery.
The organization shall evaluate the risks associated with network protocols and consider disabling those deemed vulnerable, mitigating potential exploitation attempts.
The organization shall ensure that appropriate security controls are implemented for the use of virtualized network environments, addressing potential security risks specific to these technologies.
(client) shall establish a comprehensive security management framework for network services. This framework shall identify, implement, and monitor robust security mechanisms, service levels, and service requirements for all network services, fostering a holistic approach to securing network functionality.
(client) shall conduct risk assessments to identify and implement the necessary security measures (features, service levels, and requirements) tailored to each network service. This may involve collaboration with both internal and external network service providers.
(client) shall establish contractual agreements with network service providers that clearly define and hold them accountable for implementing the agreed-upon security measures for the services they provide.
(client) shall conduct a thorough evaluation of the network service provider's ability to manage services securely. This assessment shall include ongoing monitoring of their security practices and the establishment of (client)'s right to conduct security audits of the provider's infrastructure.
(client) shall utilize third-party security attestations provided by network service providers as additional evidence of their adherence to industry-recognized security standards.
(client) shall explicitly define which networks and network services are authorized for access by personnel within (client).
(client) shall mandate robust authentication protocols, potentially involving multi-factor authentication, for accessing various network services.
(client) shall establish well-defined authorization procedures to determine authorized users for specific networks and network services, adhering to the principle of least privilege.
(client) shall implement a combination of technological controls to safeguard access to network connections and services, alongside documented procedures to guide proper access practices.
(client) shall specify acceptable methods for accessing networks and services (e.g., secure VPN or encrypted wireless network).
(client) shall monitor user access attributes such as time, location, and other relevant details at the time of access to identify potential anomalies and suspicious activity.
(client) shall implement a proactive network service usage monitoring program to detect and address potential security concerns, unauthorized access attempts, or anomalous activity.
(client) shall leverage industry-standard security technologies like multi-factor authentication, encryption in transit and at rest, and network connection controls to secure connections to network services, creating a layered defense.
(client) shall define and maintain up-to-date technical parameters necessary for establishing secure connections to network services, aligned with defined security policies and dynamic network connection requirements.
(client) shall define caching practices (e.g., using a content delivery network) and associated parameters that enable users to choose between performance, availability, and confidentiality considerations, while prioritizing secure data handling.
(client) shall establish clear procedures for restricting access to network services or applications when necessary to mitigate potential misuse or security incidents. These procedures should be integrated with (client)'s overall incident response plan.
(client) shall implement a network segmentation strategy to divide its network infrastructure into distinct security domains. This approach shall group information services, users, and information systems based on security classifications, criticality, or organizational units.
(client) shall design network segmentation to create security domains with varying levels of trust and access controls. Considerations may include public access, desktop environments, server infrastructure, risk classifications of systems, or departmental needs.
(client) shall leverage either physical separation of network infrastructure or logical network segmentation techniques to establish distinct security domains.
(client) shall establish well-defined perimeters for each network domain, clearly delineating the boundaries between domains.
(client) shall restrict inter-domain traffic and control all authorized communications between network domains through secure gateways (e.g., firewalls, filtering routers). Access controls at these gateways will be based on a risk assessment.
(client) shall conduct a comprehensive risk assessment to determine the appropriate level of network segmentation for each domain. This assessment will consider access control policies, information sensitivity, value classification, and the impact of implementing gateway technology.
(client) shall establish robust security measures for wireless networks due to their inherent lack of a clearly defined perimeter. Radio coverage adjustment may be implemented to further enhance wireless network segregation.
For sensitive network environments, (client) shall treat all wireless access attempts as external connections. This access will be segregated from internal networks until it passes through security controls (e.g., firewalls) and is explicitly granted access based on network access control policies.
(client) shall maintain separate wireless networks for guest access and personnel use, provided personnel devices comply with established security policies.
(client) shall enforce security restrictions on guest WiFi that are at least as stringent as those applied to personnel WiFi. This will discourage unauthorized use of guest WiFi by personnel.
(client) shall implement a web filtering solution to manage access to external websites and reduce exposure to malicious content, including viruses, phishing attempts, and illegal information.
(client) shall maintain a categorized web filter list to block access to known malicious websites (e.g., malware distributors, phishing sites), command-and-control servers, websites identified via threat intelligence, and websites hosting illegal content.
(client) shall establish a clear policy outlining the types of websites users may access for work purposes. This may include restrictions on uploading information except for valid business reasons.
(client) shall create and regularly update web access policies that define acceptable and restricted online resources, including websites and web-based applications.
(client) shall conduct security awareness training for personnel on the proper and secure use of online resources. This training shall cover (client)'s web access policies, the process for reporting security concerns, and the proper handling of browser security warnings.
(client) shall train personnel to exercise caution when encountering browser security warnings that indicate a website may not be safe. Users shall be advised to avoid bypassing these warnings and to report any suspicious websites to the designated contact point.
(client) shall establish a comprehensive cryptography policy outlining the approved methods for utilizing cryptographic controls and the associated key management practices.
(client) shall align this policy with (client)'s overarching information security policy to ensure consistency with established information protection principles.
(client) shall implement a risk-based approach to identify the appropriate level of information protection required. This will inform the selection of cryptographic algorithms based on the classification and sensitivity of the information being protected.
(client) shall leverage cryptographic solutions to safeguard information at rest on mobile user devices and storage media. Additionally, information in transit to or from these devices shall be encrypted.
(client) shall establish clear procedures for key management. This includes secure generation, robust protection of cryptographic keys, and documented processes for encrypted information recovery in the event of lost, compromised, or damaged keys.
(client) shall designate clear roles and responsibilities for the implementation and enforcement of effective cryptography usage rules within (client).
(client) shall assign distinct roles and responsibilities for key management activities, encompassing key generation and secure storage practices.
(client) shall establish a set of approved cryptographic standards. This includes approved cryptographic algorithms, cipher strength, cryptographic solutions, and authorized usage practices.
(client) shall address the potential impact of encrypted information on content inspection controls (e.g., malware detection, content filtering). (client) shall implement appropriate mitigation strategies to ensure information security.
(client) shall consider relevant regulations and national restrictions on cryptographic techniques in different regions when implementing cryptography.
(client) shall establish service level agreements (SLAs) or contracts with external cryptographic service providers (e.g., certificate authorities). These agreements shall address liability, service reliability, and response times for provided services.
(client) shall implement secure processes for the entire cryptographic key lifecycle, encompassing generation, storage, archiving, retrieval, distribution, retirement, and destruction of cryptographic keys, this includes establishing methodologies for generating distinct keys for various cryptographic systems and applications.
(client) shall define procedures for issuing and obtaining public key certificates.
(client) shall implement secure methods for distributing keys to authorized entities and activating them upon receipt.
(client) shall establish secure key storage procedures, along with protocols for authorized users to access keys.
(client) shall define protocols for changing or updating keys, including triggers for key rotation and the associated change procedures.
(client) shall outline procedures for dealing with compromised cryptographic keys.
(client) shall establish a process for revoking keys, including methods for deactivation or withdrawal (e.g., compromised keys or user departure).
(client) shall define procedures for recovering lost or corrupted cryptographic keys.
(client) shall implement secure key backup and archiving practices.
(client) shall securely destroy cryptographic keys upon retirement according to established protocols.
(client) shall subject key management activities to logging and auditing procedures.
(client) shall set activation and deactivation dates for keys to restrict their usage within designated periods, aligned with (client)'s key management policies.
(client) shall address legal requests for access to cryptographic keys (e.g., court orders requiring decryption of information as evidence).
(client) shall implement robust measures to safeguard all cryptographic keys against unauthorized access, use, disclosure, modification, and loss.
(client) shall establish physical security measures for equipment used to generate, store, and archive cryptographic keys.
(client) shall leverage encryption to protect sensitive or critical information, both at rest and in transit, to ensure confidentiality.
(client) shall utilize digital signatures or message authentication codes to verify the authenticity and integrity of sensitive or critical information stored or transmitted. Additionally, (client) shall implement algorithms for file integrity checking.
(client) shall employ cryptographic techniques to provide evidence of an event or action's occurrence or non-occurrence, ensuring non-repudiation.
(client) shall achieve user and system entity authentication through the utilization of cryptographic techniques. This ensures that only authorized users and entities can access or interact with system users, entities, and resources.
(client) shall establish and enforce a secure development lifecycle (SDLC) to integrate security considerations throughout the software development process, minimizing vulnerabilities in applications.
(client) shall recognize secure development as a fundamental requirement for building secure services, architectures, software, and systems.
(client) shall maintain separate development, testing, and production environments to mitigate security risks.
(client) shall provide clear guidance on integrating security throughout the SDLC, encompassing secure development methodologies and secure coding practices tailored to each programming language used.
(client) shall mandate the inclusion of security requirements within the specification and design phases of the SDLC.
(client) shall establish mandatory security checkpoints throughout development projects to monitor and address security concerns.
(client) shall implement a comprehensive security testing strategy, including regression testing, code scanning, and penetration testing, to identify and remediate vulnerabilities.
(client) shall maintain source code and configuration files within secure repositories to protect sensitive information and prevent unauthorized access.
(client) shall implement secure version control practices to track code changes and maintain a secure audit trail.
(client) shall provide mandatory application security awareness training to developers, equipping them with the necessary knowledge to prevent, identify, and rectify vulnerabilities.
(client) shall invest in enhancing developers' capabilities to prevent, detect, and remediate vulnerabilities within applications.
(client) shall establish clear licensing requirements and explore cost-effective solutions while minimizing potential future licensing issues.
(client) shall ensure that any outsourced development adheres to (client)'s established secure development lifecycle practices.
(client) shall integrate the identification, specification, and approval of information security requirements throughout the application development or acquisition lifecycle.
(client) shall conduct risk assessments to inform the identification and specification of application security requirements. These assessments shall be conducted in collaboration with information security specialists.
(client) shall establish application security requirements that encompass a broad spectrum of security topics, tailored to the application's specific purpose and functionality.
(client) shall implement robust authentication mechanisms to establish a verifiable level of trust in user identities interacting with applications. 
(client) shall define the type and classification level of information processed by the application. Additionally, (client) shall implement appropriate data access controls to safeguard sensitive information.
(client) shall ensure applications are resilient against malicious attacks or disruptions through the implementation of effective security measures, such as protection against buffer overflows and SQL injections.
(client) shall ensure applications comply with all relevant legal, statutory, and regulatory requirements in the jurisdiction where data is processed.
(client) shall implement necessary controls to safeguard the privacy of all parties involved in application usage.
(client) shall establish comprehensive measures to protect the confidentiality of all sensitive data processed, stored, and in transit.
(client) shall mandate the use of secure encryption to safeguard communication between all parties interacting with the application.
(client) shall implement robust input controls, including data integrity checks and thorough validation procedures, to ensure the accuracy and security of user-provided information.
(client) shall leverage automated controls, such as approval limits or dual approvals, to enhance application security and streamline processes.
(client) shall implement output controls to restrict access to application outputs based on user authorization and access levels.
(client) shall implement limitations on the content of "free-text" fields to prevent the uncontrolled storage of confidential data.
(client) shall ensure application security requirements are aligned with established business processes, including transaction logging, monitoring, and non-repudiation considerations.
(client) shall ensure application security requirements seamlessly integrate with existing security controls (e.g., logging and monitoring systems, data leakage detection systems).
(client) shall define and implement secure error message handling practices for applications to minimize potential vulnerabilities.
(client) shall define the required level of trust for each party's identity involved in transactional services.
(client) shall implement mechanisms to identify and prevent any lack of integrity in information exchanged or processed within transactional services (e.g., using cyclic redundancy checks, hashing, digital signatures).
(client) shall establish clear authorization processes for approving content, issuing, or signing key transactional documents.
(client) shall implement controls to ensure confidentiality, integrity, proof of dispatch and receipt, and non-repudiation of key transactional documents (e.g., contracts).
(client) shall enforce confidentiality and integrity protections for all transaction data (e.g., orders, delivery details, receipts).
(client) shall define clear guidelines for how long transactional data confidentiality needs to be maintained.
(client) shall incorporate relevant insurance and contractual security requirements into the development and implementation of applications.
(client) shall implement robust controls to maintain the confidentiality and integrity of order information within electronic ordering and payment applications.
(client) shall establish appropriate procedures for verifying payment information provided by customers to mitigate fraud risks.
(client) shall implement measures to prevent the loss or duplication of transaction information, ensuring data accuracy and reliability.
(client) shall ensure transaction details are stored in secure environments that are not accessible from the public
(client) shall ensure robust security practices are embedded throughout the entire certificate or signature management process for applications using trusted authorities (e.g., digital signatures or certificates
(client) shall establish, document, maintain, and enforce secure engineering principles to be applied throughout all information system development activities.
(client) shall integrate security considerations throughout all architectural layers (business, data, applications, and technology) during the system design phase.
(client) shall analyze new technologies for potential security risks and ensure designs are reviewed against known attack patterns.
(client) shall leverage secure engineering principles to guide user authentication techniques, secure session controls, and data validation and sanitization practices.
(client) shall assess the effectiveness of security controls in preventing, detecting, or responding to security incidents.
(client) shall specific security controls required for particular business processes (e.g., encryption, integrity checking, digital signatures).
(client) shall assess integration points for security controls within the overall security architecture and technical infrastructure.
(client) shall assess the combined effect of individual security controls (manual and automated) in achieving a comprehensive security posture.
(client) shall ensure secure engineering principles seamlessly integrate with existing security architecture and technical infrastructure, such as pki, iam, data leakage prevention, and dynamic access control mechanisms.
"(client) shall consider the following when selecting technologies:
•	(client)'s capability to develop and support the chosen technology.
•	Cost, time, and complexity associated with meeting security requirements.
•	Alignment with current security best practices."
(client) shall implement security architecture principles such as "security by design," "defense in depth," "security by default," "least privilege," "usability and manageability," and "least functionality."
(client) shall conduct security-oriented design reviews to identify potential security vulnerabilities, ensure specified security controls meet requirements, and document any exceptions due to overriding business needs.
(client) shall implement system hardening measures to strengthen system security posture.
(client) shall adopt a "zero trust" security model, assuming potential breaches and implementing a rigorous verification process for all access requests to information systems.
(client) shall implement a "never trust, always verify" approach, requiring thorough verification of all access attempts to information systems.
(client) shall enforce mandatory encryption for all communication with information systems to protect sensitive data in transit.
(client) shall enforce the principle of least privilege, granting users only the minimum level of access required to perform their designated tasks within information systems.
(client) shall implement dynamic access control techniques that consider user context and data classification to grant or deny access requests to information systems.
(client) shall require the use of strong authentication mechanisms, such as multi-factor authentication, for all access attempts to information systems.
(client) shall ensure secure engineering principles are applied to outsourced development projects through contractual agreements with suppliers. These agreements should mandate alignment with (client)'s security needs.
(client) shall conduct regular reviews of security engineering principles and established engineering procedures to ensure their effectiveness in maintaining strong security standards. These reviews should also consider potential new threats and technological advancements.
(client) shall consider applying secure engineering principles to the design and configuration of various techniques, including fault tolerance, segregation and tamper resistance
(client) may utilize secure virtualization techniques to isolate applications running on the same physical device, limiting the impact of a compromised instance.
(client) may implement tamper resistance techniques to detect physical or logical attempts to tamper with information containers and potentially prevent data extraction through destruction.
(client) shall establish and enforce organization-wide processes to promote secure coding practices throughout the software development lifecycle.
(client) shall define and implement a minimum secure coding baseline that applies to all software development activities.
(client) shall extend secure coding principles and governance to cover software components obtained from third-parties and open-source software used within (client).
(client) shall monitor real-world threats and stay up-to-date on software vulnerabilities to inform the continuous improvement and evolution of its secure coding practices.
(client) shall apply secure coding principles to both new software development and code reuse scenarios, including in-house development and products or services provided to external parties.
(client) shall establish clear expectations and approved secure coding principles for both internal and outsourced development projects.
(client) shall provide developers with training on common coding practices and vulnerabilities to raise awareness and improve secure coding skills.
(client) shall configure development tools (e.g., IDEs) to support the creation of secure code and promote adherence to secure coding principles.
(client) shall maintain and update development tools (e.g., compilers) on a regular basis to address potential security vulnerabilities.
(client) shall ensure developers possess the necessary qualifications and skills to write secure code.
(client) shall integrate secure design and architecture principles, including threat modeling, into the software development process.
(client) shall establish secure coding standards and mandate their use where relevant.
(client) may consider implementing controlled development environments to enhance code security.
(client) shall define and enforce secure coding practices specific to the programming languages and techniques used in development projects.
(client) shall encourage the use of secure programming techniques such as pair programming, refactoring, peer code reviews, security iterations, and test-driven development.
(client) shall promote the use of structured programming techniques to enhance code clarity and reduce vulnerabilities.
(client) shall require the proper documentation of code and the removal of programming defects that could be exploited for security vulnerabilities.
(client) shall prohibit the use of insecure design techniques such as hard-coded passwords, unapproved code samples, and unauthenticated web services.
(client) shall integrate security testing throughout the development lifecycle, including static application security testing (SAST) to identify and remediate security vulnerabilities in software.
(client) shall conduct an analysis of the software's attack surface and implement the principle of least privilege before deploying the software. This analysis should identify potential attack vectors and ensure user access is limited to the minimum required functionality.
(client) shall conduct an analysis of the most common programming errors and document the methods used to mitigate them before making the software operational.
(client) shall ensure software updates are securely packaged and deployed to minimize risks during the update process.
(client) shall establish a process for handling reported information security vulnerabilities in accordance with a vulnerability disclosure policy (consider referencing section 8.8 of your broader policy document).
(client) shall implement logging mechanisms to capture errors and suspected attacks. These logs should be reviewed regularly to identify potential vulnerabilities and inform code adjustments.
(client) shall implement measures to protect source code against unauthorized access and tampering. This may involve using configuration management tools with features like access control and version control.
(client) shall maintain an inventory of external libraries used in development and regularly update them with the latest releases to address potential vulnerabilities.
(client) shall establish a process for the selection, authorization, and reuse of well-vetted components, particularly those related to authentication and cryptography.
(client) shall consider the license, security history, and potential vulnerabilities of external components before incorporating them into software.
(client) shall ensure software is maintainable, trackable, and originates from proven, reputable sources.
(client) shall consider the long-term availability of development resources and artifacts to ensure ongoing maintenance and support of the software.
(client) shall consider the potential risks, such as compromising built-in controls, before modifying software packages.
(client) shall determine whether to obtain vendor consent before modifying software packages.
(client) shall evaluate the possibility of obtaining required changes through standard program updates from the vendor instead of implementing custom modifications.
(client) shall consider the implications of becoming responsible for the future maintenance of software as a result of modifications.
(client) shall assess the impact of software modifications on compatibility with other software in use within (client).
(client) shall define and implement security testing processes throughout the development lifecycle of information systems.
(client) shall conduct thorough security testing and verification for all new information systems, upgrades, and new versions during development.
(client) shall integrate security testing as an essential component of all system and component testing procedures.
(client) shall conduct security testing against a defined set of security requirements, which may encompass both functional and non-functional aspects.
"(client) shall perform security testing that encompasses:
•	Security functions: This includes testing user authentication, access restrictions, and cryptographic implementations. 
•	Secure coding practices: Testing should assess adherence to secure coding principles. 
•	Secure configurations: This includes testing the security configurations of operating systems, firewalls, and other security components."
(client) shall establish criteria for determining the scope and extent of security testing based on the criticality, nature, and potential impact of changes being introduced to a system.
"(client) shall develop security test plans that include:
a) Detailed schedule of testing activities and specific tests to be performed. 
b) Defined inputs and expected outputs under various conditions. 
c) Established criteria for evaluating test results.
d) Clear decision points for further actions as necessary."
(client) may leverage automated security testing tools, such as code analysis tools and vulnerability scanners, to enhance testing efficiency. (client) shall verify the remediation of identified security vulnerabilities.
(client) shall conduct initial security testing for in-house development projects by the development team.
Independent acceptance testing shall be subsequently performed to ensure the system functions as intended and adheres to security requirements.
(client) shall incorporate code reviews as a relevant element of security testing to identify potential security flaws, including vulnerabilities related to unanticipated inputs and conditions.
(client) shall conduct vulnerability scanning to identify insecure configurations and potential system vulnerabilities.
(client) shall perform penetration testing to identify weaknesses in code and system design.
For outsourced development and purchased components, (client) shall establish an acquisition process that incorporates security requirements. Contracts with suppliers shall explicitly address these identified security requirements.
(client) shall evaluate products and services against established security criteria before acquisition.
(client) shall conduct security testing in a test environment that closely resembles the target production environment. This ensures that the system doesn't introduce vulnerabilities into (client)'s environment and promotes reliable testing results.
(client) shall direct, monitor, and review the activities of external developers engaged in system development projects.
(client) shall establish clear communication channels with outsourced developers to define and agree upon project requirements, security expectations, and ongoing monitoring procedures to ensure the delivered work meets those expectations.
"(client) shall include contractual safeguards in agreements with outsourced developers that address:
•	Licensing agreements, code ownership, and intellectual property rights related to the outsourced development project.
•	Secure design, coding, and testing practices aligned with (client)'s security standards.
•	Provision of the threat model for consideration by the external development team."
(client) shall conduct thorough acceptance testing for the quality, security, and accuracy of deliverables from outsourced development projects.
(client) shall require outsourced developers to provide evidence that the developed system meets minimum acceptable levels of security and privacy capabilities, such as relevant assurance reports.
(client) shall require outsourced developers to provide evidence that sufficient testing has been conducted to prevent the presence of malicious content (both intentional and unintentional) at the time of delivery.
(client) shall require outsourced developers to provide evidence that sufficient testing has been conducted to identify and address known vulnerabilities in the developed system.
(client) may consider establishing escrow agreements for the software source code in case the supplier goes out of business.
(client) shall reserve the contractual right to audit the development processes and security controls implemented by outsourced developers.
(client) shall define security requirements for the development environment used by outsourced developers.
(client) shall ensure outsourced development activities comply with applicable legislation, including data protection regulations.
(client) shall maintain separate and secure development, testing, and production environments to minimize the risk of errors or vulnerabilities impacting production systems.
(client) shall identify and implement an appropriate level of separation between production, testing, and development environments to prevent production disruptions. This may include separation by domain (e.g., virtual or physical environments).
(client) shall establish well-defined, documented, and enforced rules and authorization procedures for deploying software from development to production environments.
(client) shall conduct all testing activities related to changes in production systems and applications within dedicated testing or staging environments before deployment to production.
(client) shall restrict testing activities within production environments to clearly defined and approved exceptional circumstances.
(client) shall limit access to development tools, compilers, editors, and utility programs from production systems, granting access only when absolutely necessary.
(client) shall implement clear and consistent environment identification labels within menus and systems to reduce the risk of inadvertent errors.
(client) shall refrain from copying sensitive information into development and testing environments unless equivalent security controls are implemented for those environments.
(client) shall maintain and patch all development, integration, and testing tools, including builders, integrators, compilers, configuration systems, and libraries.
(client) shall implement secure configurations for all systems and software within each environment.
(client) shall establish access controls to restrict access to each environment based on the principle of least privilege.
(client) shall monitor changes within each environment, including code stored within those environments.
(client) shall implement secure monitoring practices for all development, test, and production environments.
(client) shall implement regular backups of all environments.
(client) shall prevent any single individual from making unreviewed or unauthorized changes to production systems. This may be achieved through segregated access rights or monitored rules-based systems.
(client) shall implement additional security measures, such as detailed logging and real-time monitoring, for exceptional situations where limited testing in the production environment is approved. These measures will facilitate the detection and response to any unauthorized changes.
(client) shall implement a formal change management process for all changes to information processing facilities and information systems.
(client) shall establish documented rules and a formal process for introducing new systems and making major changes to existing systems. This process shall include documentation, specification, testing, quality control, and managed implementation.
(client) shall define management responsibilities and procedures to ensure effective control over all changes to information processing facilities and information systems.
(client) shall develop and enforce documented change control procedures to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information throughout the entire system development lifecycle, from initial design to ongoing maintenance.
(client) shall strive to integrate change control procedures for information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure and software whenever practicable.
(client) shall conduct thorough planning and assessment of the potential impact of all changes, considering all dependencies within the IT environment.
(client) shall establish a well-defined authorization process for all proposed changes to information processing facilities and information systems.
(client) shall implement effective communication strategies to inform relevant stakeholders about approved changes.
(client) shall implement testing and acceptance procedures to ensure the functionality and security of proposed changes before implementation.
(client) shall develop and maintain deployment plans for approved changes, outlining clear implementation strategies.
(client) shall consider emergency and contingency scenarios during the change management process, including defining rollback procedures if necessary.
(client) shall maintain complete and accurate records for all changes, documenting each aspect of the change management process.
(client) shall ensure that operational documentation and user procedures are updated to reflect implemented changes to maintain system functionality and user understanding.
(client) shall keep ICT continuity plans and response and recovery procedures current to remain effective in the event of disruptions caused by approved changes.
(client) shall implement procedures for the appropriate selection, protection, and management of test information.
(client) shall select test information that ensures both the reliability of test results and the confidentiality of relevant operational information. Sensitive data, including personally identifiable information, should be excluded from test environments whenever possible.
(client) shall apply access control procedures to test environments that are equivalent to those used in operational environments.
(client) shall require separate authorization for each instance of copying operational information into a test environment.
(client) shall log the copying and use of operational information in a test environment to maintain an audit trail.
(client) shall remove or mask sensitive information if it must be used for testing purposes.
(client) shall require the proper deletion of operational information from a test environment immediately after testing is complete, to prevent unauthorized use of test data.
(client) shall securely store test information to prevent tampering, which could lead to invalid test results. Test information shall only be used for authorized testing purposes.
(client) shall establish a collaborative process for planning and agreeing upon audit tests and other assurance activities involving assessments of operational systems. This process shall involve both the tester and appropriate management personnel.
(client) shall require agreement from appropriate management for all audit requests seeking access to operational systems and data.
(client) shall define a clear and controlled scope for technical audit tests performed on operational systems.
(client) shall prioritize read-only access for audit tests of software and data whenever possible. If read-only access is insufficient to obtain necessary information, (client) may allow test execution by an experienced administrator on behalf of the auditor, following established security protocols.
(client) may require auditors to establish and verify the security posture (e.g., antivirus and patching) of devices used to access operational systems (e.g., laptops or tablets) before granting access.
(client) shall grant access beyond read-only permissions only for isolated copies of system files essential for the audit. These copies must be deleted after the audit is complete or secured appropriately if required for audit documentation.
(client) shall identify and agree with auditors on any requests for special or additional processing during audits, such as running specific audit tools.
(client) shall aim to schedule audit tests that may impact system availability outside of regular business hours whenever feasible.
(client) shall implement procedures for monitoring and logging all access to operational systems for audit and testing purposes.
